*Causing Unintentional Pain and Misunderstanding* I am very sorry for what has taken place, I apologise, I repent and I renounce the idea of any special nation. I therefore ask your forgiveness. Being a farmer myself and experiencing one of the worst droughts in the history of Sub-Sahara Africa, and seeing the untold damage it has caused people physically, mentally and spiritually it has broken me, and my sole intention was to encourage and to try and alleviate their suffering, by reminding them that God will ‘never leave them nor forsake them’ (Hebrews 13:5). My people are the widow and orphan, the bankrupt businessman, the prisoner who has been sitting in jail for 25 years and no parole likely. The person in ICU who has been told there’s no way back for you. The mother who phones me and asks me to pray for her, and for her four small children while sitting in the kitchen of their small farm house trying to deal with the loss of her husband who has just shot himself because he couldn’t take the drought any more. Or the young man who cannot get into university, not because he hasn’t got a good enough matric result , but because his single parent mother does not have enough money to pay for him. Or the old pensioner who has just lost his entire herd of cattle (numbering three) and asking me to please pray for rain. Thirty odd years ago on the 6th of April I made another honest mistake. Taking my only brother’s youngest son Alastair for a ride on our big green tractor, the boy fell forward and went under the rear wheel of the tractor and was crushed on that farm road, he died in my arms. Then I asked my brother to forgive me for the terrible mistake I made, fortunately he did. Most importantly I am fully committed to supporting the authority which God has put in place, namely our President Cyril Ramaposa and his Government, according to the Bible, God’s Holy Word. In Romans 13: we are instructed to obey and fully support the law. I will therefore continue with all my heart to work towards bringing the entire nation of South Africa to unity with each other, and with our God. We have come a long way as a nation to be where we are today and my utterances and actions are sincerely regrettable. Having met with the Christian Leaders Forum today I asked for forgiveness for the utterances I made and hereby repent. I have cancelled the planned meeting at the Loftus stadium in February next year. Once again, I am asking you to forgive me for making an honest mistake that has hurt so many people, in our beautiful country, South Africa! God bless, Angus Buchan Source: Facebook