AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS WELCOMES APPOINTMENT OF NEW ESKOM GROUP CEO The African National Congress welcomes the appointment of Andre de Ruyter, current Chief Executive of Nampak, as Group Chief Executive of our national energy utility, Eskom. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_6',112,'0','0']));The ANC has consistently viewed the challenges confronting ESKOM as a national crisis. Acknowledging the fiscal and economic threat that this poses, the view of the ANC has always been that fixing ESKOM should be an apex priority. For the ANC, stabilising Eskom is one of the most urgent and pressing priorities the economy faces. With Mr De Ruyter's appointment, we are now called upon as South Africans to come together and play our part in rebuilding Eskom as part of growing the South Africa we want. The ANC calls on the board, management, staff and stakeholders and customers of Eskom to approach this development as a new departure for this important state-owned enterprise. The responsibility accepted by Mr De Ruyter is one that must be shared by all South Africans whose wellbeing depends on the wellbeing of the energy utility. While events of the past have justified public criticism of and cynicism about Eskom, the task of rebuilding and renewal must now begin with urgency and with unity. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_5',113,'0','0']));The ANC commends the Board of Eskom and government as the shareholder for the rigour they applied in arriving at Mr De Ruyter's selection for this onerous role. The ANC wishes Mr De Ruyter well in leading the management and staff in turning around the fortunes and reputation of a national asset that plays a critical role in the country's economy, and assures him of the governing party's support for the efforts he will lead to set Eskom on a footing that will enable our economy to grow and contribute to energy security in the SADC region. The ANC is confident that the appointment of the new CEO will strengthen its capacity to deliver reliable energy to South Africans. No economy can grow and thrive without reliable energy. Accordingly, the ANC urges management and the board to pay focused attention on improving governance and efficiency in the organization. Statement issued by the African National Congress, 18 November 2019