ANC IN FINAL PUSH TO MOBILISE PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR NHI The African National Congress (ANC) has entered the final push to mobilise its members, supporters and all citizens to make submissions in support of the National Health Insurance gill. The ANC urges the people of South Africa to ensure that their individual submissions reach parliament by Friday. 29 November 2019. The ANC is confident that the overwhelming majority Of South Africans support NHI. We are encouraged by the progress we have already registered in this campaign. We are making a clarion call to all our structures, supporters and volunteeers to intensify their collective efforts in this final phase and encourage all people to ensure that their submissions reach Parliament by Friday. The ANC believes that NHI will address many of the pressing challenges confronting the health Sector, The ANC proceeds from the premise that healthcare is a human right and not a privilege reserved for a few. Access to healthcare must depend on people's health needs and not their socio-economic status. NHI will deliver accessible. quality and affordable healthcare to all citizens irrespective of their socio-economic status or ability to pay. This is a significant step towards realising the vision of the Freedom Charter which States. among Other things,: medical care and hospitalization Shall be provided for all. with special care for mothers and young children" All ANC Structures, volunteers and supporters Should ensure that all Signed submissions reach parliament by on Friday, 29 November 2019. All Submissions must be addressed to: Vuyokazi Majalamba: vmajalamba@parliament.gov.za; 021 403 3770: 083 709 8522 or contact: your nearest parliamentary constituencyv office (PCO) or your organisation for assistance. Alternatively, South Africans Can use the following link to make their voices heard: https://docs.googIe.com/forms/d/e/IFAIpQLSfn7eoj9HuMKV-H2BArp-dojqQeWqRbJxh56r7RsjDsk5ppA/viewform It is important to remember that all submissions must be received by 16:00 on Friday, 29 November 2019. Late Submissions will be rejected. *** Text: Issued by the ANC, 27 November 2019