New R152 million balancing tank set to improve wastewater treatment in Joburg 11 November 2019 Today, 11 November 2019, I was joined by the MMC for Environment and Infrastructure Services, Cllr Nico de Jager, and management of Johannesburg Water as we officially launched the newly completed balancing tank at Bushkoppie Wastewater Treatment Works. This R152 million project will improve compliance with effluent standards and allow for better control of the incoming flow of sewage to the Bushkoppie Wastewater Treatment Works, which has a catchment area including the southern suburbs of Johannesburg, Soweto east, parts of Roodepoort and the industrial zones in the south of Johannesburg. There has been growing densification in the area over the past 10 years, with smallholdings being transformed into new housing developments and office parks. This rapid growth has put enormous pressure on our existing infrastructure. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_4',113,'0','0']));Growing volumes of wastewater, combined with storm surges during the rainy season, meant the sheer volume of water reaching the works has exceeded our ability to treat it. The new balancing tack will help balance the variations in the settled wastewater inflow to the activated sludge reactors, stabilising the liquid treatment process. Considering the enormous and growing demand for water and sanitation, Johannesburg Water is increasing its capacity at Bushkoppie in order to provide the first-class wastewater treatment works to cater for present and future increase in demand. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_6',114,'0','0']));The scope of the work includes: - A reinforced concrete balancing tank of approximately 25,000 m3 in volume; - Motor Control Centre  Room; - A pump station and various pipelines; - An access roadway; - Mechanical equipment including mixers and pumps; and, - Electrical equipment, control and instrumentation equipment, plus alterations to existing channels and pipes. This project is but one of many that have reinforced our commitment to increased maintenance and expansion of our infrastructure, following this administration inheriting a shocking R170 billion infrastructure backlog. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_7',116,'0','0']));This project will also help to protect our communities from environmental degradation, as seen in municipalities in the south of Gauteng. This is in line with my commitment to protecting our environment for future generations. The City will remain committed to providing all residents with quality water and sanitation services that meet the needs of the present, as well as the future, demand. I would like to thank the DA caucus as well as members of our coalition government; the IFP, ACDP, COPE, UDM and Freedom Front Plus for their continued support in delivering quality basic services to our residents. I am also thankful for the contributions of the EFF which, although not a member of the coalition, votes with us on an issue by issue basis. Issued by Eleanor Mavimbela, Officer: External Communications, 11 November 2019