EFF statement on tabling Motion of No Confidence Against the City of Tshwane Executive Mayor 26 November 2019 The Economic Freedom Fighters' Tshwane Caucus submitted an urgent motion of no confidence against Tshwane Executive Mayor, Stevens Mokgalapa on Monday, 25 November 2019. The City of Tshwane has been limping from one disaster to another ever since Mr Mokgalapa took over as Executive Mayor; and the administration he leads has proven incapable of resolving the problems faced by the citizens of Tshwane. Our motion is premised on substantial and glaring failures by the Executive Mayor, including, but not limited to the following: 1. There is an escalating water crisis in the City of Tshwane, more specifically at the water treatment plant in Rooiwaal which supplies water to residents of Hammanskraal. The Executive Mayor publicly lied and said the water in the area is clean and fit for human consumption. The Human Sciences Research Council and the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research later conducted assessment of the water treatment plant, and found the water unfit for human consumption. 2. There is a general deterioration of fiscal and procurement management standards at the municipality, which is a continuation of a trend since the DA took over leadership of the municipality. It has gotten worse under Mr Mokgalapa, with numerous deviations in the awarding of tenders to some companies. 3. Residents of Laudium, Atteridgeville, Mamelodi and Soshanguve continue to experience power outages and have even embarked on protests against the City for failing to deal with the constant power outages. Despite the seriousness of these challenges, Mr Mokgalapa has demonstrated no urgency and wherewithal to resolve these challenges. He does not seem to be interested in the government of the City at all, but rather obsessed with the idea of being in power. We are therefore convinced that Mr Mokgalapa is woefully incapable of providing the leadership required for a complex metropolitan council such as Tshwane. We call on all other political parties to support the removal of the current Mayor, and elect a capable mayor to lead the people of Tshwane. Issued by Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, National Spokesperson, EFF, 26 November 2019