IFP: Intervention by AfriForum on Senzo Meyiwa’s murder is an indictment on SA’s law enforcement agencies 7 November 2019 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The IFP feels vindicated after the intervention by the Afriforum on the high-profile murder case of the late Bafana Bafana Captain Senzo Meyiwa because it has been a lone voice in calling for action in this matter. As the IFP we have been calling for progress and justice to be served on the Senzo Meyiwa murder case but our calls fall on deaf ears. No one has heeded our calls and taken us seriously. Now, this intervention has brought the competency and capability of the law enforcement agencies into sharp focus. It is a direct indictment to the country’s SAPS and the NPA. The SAPS and the NPA should be ashamed about the step taken by the AfriForum to assist them to investigate the cases which both of them have failed to make a breakthrough in arresting the killers. It has been five years since Senzo Meyiwa was shot and killed at a house in Vosloorus on Gauteng's East Rand. Till today no one has been arrested and the SAPS are capable of arresting wrong people. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0']));Furthermore, the intervention by the AfriForum to intervene is a clear indication that people of this country doubt the competency of the police instead they put their hopes on civil right organisations. This must be a wake-up call for the Minister of Police Hon Bheki Cele . He must revive SAPS and NPA to wake up from their slumber and reclaim back the lost ground by cleansing their image which has been tainted by corruption and incompetency in solving critical murder cases in this country. If they don’t do any drastic changes within the structures of these important law enforcement agencies, more damage will be done. They must bring hope to the people that they can still trust the SAPS. The IFP feel that the people of this country deserve clear answers from the Minister of Police General Bheki Cele, the National Police Commissioner, Khehla Sithole about how long the nation must wait to know who killed Senzo Meyiwa. It is absurd for the Minister of Police Bheki Cele to say he is satisfied with the investigation. Is the Minister telling us that he is satisfied about the delay in arresting the killers? This is totally outrageous. The Hon Minister should save his ‘satisfaction’ for when someone has been arrested, convicted and sentenced and the public finally know what exactly happened. It is indeed sad that the Meyiwa family keeps reliving the painful death of their son while the Minister and his law enforcement agencies continue to ridicule their pain. It is high time for the National Police Commissioner to come clear to the nation on haw far the investigation about the killing of Senzo Meyiwa is. The Meyiwa family have lost all the hope and turned to Afriforum when we have law enforcement agencies who get salaries monthly to do their job. The whole country has lost patience as the investigators and everyone involved in this case, seem to be dragging feet in finding the murderers. We will not rest as a nation until the police apprehend the killers. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));We demand that the NPA and SAPS allow the Afriforum to deal with this case because their team of investigators have failed to make a breakthrough. They must stop playing games with the whereabouts of the docket. If it was relatives of ANC top leaders who died the killers would have been found sooner. The IFP calls on the National Police Commissioner to give trustworthy updates on what progress has been made in arresting the killers of Senzo Meyiwa and allow the Afriforum to intervene without any delay. Issued by Blessed Gwala, ,IFP KZN Provincial Spokesperson on Community Safety and Liaison, 7 November 2019