MKMVA denounces the unseemly scenes of cash being distributed at ANC events, and calls for those responsible to be exposed and disciplined without any hesitation 9 November 2019 The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) is dismayed, shocked and angered by video clips that show money being doled out to crowds attending ANC events in Mpumalanga. As is the case with the African National Congress (ANC) national leadership, the leadership of MKMVA also received video footage showing money being distributed, among other similar incidents, at an ANC event in Nkomazi in Mpumalanga. Similar shocking video clips are also being distributed on social media. The ANC Region of eHlanzeni is due to hold its elective conference later this year, and the Province of Mpumalanga will hold it's Elective Conference in February next year. Unseemly scenes such as these, of money being handed out from boots of luxury cars and thrown from stages into crowds of ANC members and supporters, inevitably create the awful impression that money is being used to buy votes, with the intention to influence the outcomes of these important elective conferences. Actions such as these should be condemned without any reservation. This is entirely alien to the revolutionary character of the ANC. MKMVA calls on the leadership of the ANC leadership to be more unequivocal in their reaction, and the measures taken, to stop this scourge, than has been the case until now. Condemnation without immediate disciplinary action is simply not enough. MKMVA is disgusted by the humiliating disrespect behavior such as this shows for our people. This is not the kind of despicable conduct that our members have fought to achieve, and many of members have made the ultimate sacrifice and laid down their lives for. Those who behave like this cannot be considered to be comrades, they are trampling on the sacrifices of millions of South Africans who struggled for our freedom, and the establishment of our democratic state. The democratic and free vote of every single South African is sacred, and may never be attempted to be bought by anyone! MKMVA will not tolerate the reactionary and anti-revolutionary conduct of these thugs. These incidences, and the evidence brought to the attention of the leadership of the ANC, MUST be thoroughly - and with speed - investigated, and those who think they can conduct themselves in this unbecoming fashion in the name of the ANC, should stopped in their tracks. Disciplinary procedures should already have be instituted swiftly, and without any hesitation. MKMVA calls on all our members, together with each and every ANC member and supporter to resist the temptation of our votes being commodified and bought, and to expose anyone who try to do so. Every one who loves the ANC must declare without any hesitation: #NotInOurName! Issued by Carl Niehaus, Member of the National Executive Committee (NEC) of MKMVA, and MKMVA National Spokesperson, 9 November 2019