Malema in court after AfriForum charges him for allegedly firing shots Following continuous pressure by AfriForum, Julius Malema, leader of the EFF, appeared in the East London district court today for the discharge of a firearm. The trial date has been set for 24 February 2020. The National Prosecuting Authority is prosecuting Malema for the discharge of a firearm in a built-up or public area without good reason to do so, as well as the possession of a firearm and ammunition without the necessary licence and authorisation. Adriaan Snyman also appeared in court today for the same incident. Snyman is alleged to be the owner of a private security firm that provided services to the EFF at the time of the incident. In video footage of the incident it looks as though Snyman hands the firearm to Malema. Snyman is being charged for the alleged illegal ownership of a suspected firearm and ammunition, as well as the fact that he seemingly handed the firearm to Malema. It follows after AfriForum laid charges against Malema and Snyman in August 2018, after Malema allegedly fired several shots with an assault weapon during the EFF’s five-year celebrations in Mdantsane in the Eastern Cape. The NPA however dragged its feet regarding a decision about whether to prosecute, despite the fact that prima facie proof exists that Malema allegedly committed an offense. “It is a good thing that Malema finally has his day in court for this incident. We’ve already noticed that this alleged behaviour has been repeated by others elsewhere in the country – the fact that he hasn’t been prosecuted has caused people to regard it as acceptable behaviour. It’s regrettable that AfriForum had to put this much pressure on the NPA to prosecute, despite obvious proof of the alleged violation,” says Ian Cameron, AfriForum’s Head of Community Safety. AfriForum is however concerned about the fact that the NPA still hasn’t informed Marnus Kamfer, AfriForum’s Legal and Risk Manager and complainant in this case, about the court date. “It is unacceptable that the accused in a case has more rights than the complainant. AfriForum will therefore monitor the process closely to ensure that justice is served,” says Kamfer. Statement issued by Ian Cameron, Head: Community Safety, AfriForum, 27 November 2019