Deepening water crisis in FS spreads as provincial day zero looms The severity of the water crisis in the Free State continues to spread as residents in Senekal, Marquard and Ficksburg sit with a plethora of water-related issues which have continued to plague community members within the Setsoto Local Municipality. During the last 14 days a reservoir in Senekal has overflowed with millions of litres of water running out into the veldt. This, while ENGO an Elderly Caring Centre in Senekal, has for the last 3 weeks not had access to running water and had to purchase drinkable water from local grocery outlets, which costs residents an exorbitant amount to just maintain their basic standards of living. This is further problematic because the water which is wasted at the overflowing reservoir has already been purified at the expense of taxpayers. Yesterday, in Marquard the taps ran dry, this whilst the DA since 2016 has continuously requested Setsoto Local Municipality to fix the sluices of the dam to prevent water from siphoning out underneath. This dam in Marquard also broke during the heavy rainfall experienced in the beginning of 2019, which caused the dam to lose 50% of its catchment capacity. Additionally, the cables and parts of the transformer which assists in transporting excess water to a holding dam was sabotaged due to a lack of adequate security and policing around the dam. Similarly, residents within Ficksburg have been struggling due to the cabling and pump station of the sand pumps within the Caledon River having been vandalised again due to a lack of security measures, which will cost the Setsoto Local Municipality in excess of R4 million to get up and running again. In the recent report tabled by the Auditor-General, it is notable that the Setsoto Local Municipality incurred material water losses of R7 million which represents 26% of the water purchased. It is criminal to think that clear water continues to be squandered due to mismanagement and an inherent lack of infrastructure in the Free State. Provincial and local governments blame the drought and Apartheid for water supply problems, but residents know that the problems are management related under a current government that places factional party affiliation above expertise and work ethic. In a question submitted within the Free State Legislature in June this year, the provincial government conceded to the DA that the municipalities in the Free State collectively owe the Water Boards a whopping R4,6 billion. It is clear that the legacy of Ace Magashule continues long after his deployment to Luthuli House. Threats to electricity supply due to the combined municipal Eskom debt of over R9,3 billion in the province further threaten the ability to pump water. The DA will continue to put pressure on the provincial government to ensure that they are in a position to restore the dignity of residents within the Setsoto Local Municipality and other municipalities by giving effect to their constitutional right to water and are held accountable for withholding the basic right to water of Free Staters. Free Staters deserve a government that will use public funds to put the Free State first, better their lives and protect them in times of crisis. It is unthinkable to imagine that the provincial government continues to squander hundreds of millions of rands from the public purse, during a historically devastating drought crisis, which threatens job losses and food security across South Africa. Statement issued by David van Vuuren MP - DA Chief Whip of the Official Opposition in the Free State Legislature, 28 November 2019