251 children die as a result of gender-based violence in Gauteng 26 November 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) is deeply concerned that 251 children have died as a result of gender-based violence in Gauteng over the past five years. This was revealed to me by the Gauteng MEC for Community Safety, Faith Mazibuko in a written reply to my questions tabled in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. According to MEC Mazibuko from 2014 to 2018, 251 children died with 13 children dying alongside their mothers or grandmothers as a result of gender-based violence in the province. The safety of our women and children is under threat as it is reported on a daily basis that women and children are being murdered. Furthermore, 131,210 gender-based violence cases has been opened at the Police Stations around Gauteng from 2014 to 2018. Of these cases opened only 44,522 arrests have been made with only 9,786 convictions. It is worrying that many cases have been opened but the arrest and conviction rates are very low. It is high time that cases of gender-based violence are prioritised to ensure justice for the victims. There are no specialised units within SAPS that deal solely with gender-based violence. The DA believes that the only way to fight the scourge of gender-based violence is through professionalising our police service. We need police officers that are specifically trained to deal with gender-based violence and who have a thorough knowledge of the legislative frameworks for women’s rights and the rights of child crime victims. I will be writing to MEC Mazibuko calling for the establishment of specialised units to deal with gender-based violence. As we mark 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children, we call on communities to speak out on issues of gender-based violence as this social ill has a negative impact on the well-being of all our people. The awareness against gender-based violence must not only be conducted during the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children but in 365 days a year. Issued by Refiloe Nt’sekhe, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Social Development, 26 November 2019