NO ACCOUNTABILITY FOR KLEBSIELLA BABY DEATHS AT THELLE MOGOERANE HOSPITAL There has been no accountability for the deaths of 6 new-born babies last year from Klebsiella at the Thelle Mogoerane Hospital in Vosloorus, which continues to have a high maternal and neonatal death rate. This is revealed by Gauteng Health MEC Bandile Masuku in a written reply to my questions in the Gauteng Legislature. According to Masuku, the investigation into the Klebsiella deaths, which led to a shutdown and thorough cleaning of the neonatal ward, found that there were “a number of systemic challenges faced by the health system in Gauteng. These included overcrowding above bed allocation, shortage of equipment and disposable medical stock due to high turnover of babies that needed critical care. The investigation further noted that no appropriate isolation facilities for infectious neonates and a shortage of staff. The investigation also noted the lack of IPC (infection and prevention control) oversight.” Despite these damning findings, Masuku’s response to disciplinary actions against those responsible is that “Deaths in the Neonatal ICU reﬂect conditions in the health system. Systems are in place to prevent infections and no deﬁnite source of infection was identified at the time.” He also says that cases were “referred to the Public Service Commission (PSC) for investigation and the department is awaiting the final report.” This is a weak response to the tragedy of avoidable baby deaths. It ignores the fact that staff accused Hospital CEO Nomonde Mqhayi-Mbambo of ignoring their warnings that overcrowding in the neonatal ward increased the risk of infection. This hospital continues to have worryingly high maternal mortality and neonatal mortality rates. The average Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) this year is 212 per 100 000, which is more than double the target of 100 per 100 000. The average Neonatal Mortality Rate (NMR) is 19 per 100 000 which is also double the 9.5 per 100 000 target. Masuku attributes the high MMR and NMR figures to the following factors: High burden of disease in pregnant patients. High number of referrals of high risk patients from surrounding clinics and district hospitals. Shortage of staff speciﬁcally nurses and medical ofﬁcers. Inadequate infrastructure to accommodate all the neonates resulting in overcrowding of the neonatal ward increasing risk of sepsis. Widespread difficulties with the Central Supplier Database have made it challenging to procure consumables. Shortage of staff speciﬁcally nurses and medical ofﬁcers, premature babies required higher skilled dedicated nurses. Some of the preterm mothers present In labour and do not have enough time to receive steroids. Masuku says that there is a need for a dedicated Obstetrics theatre and the staff required to run it, but he does not give an undertaking or a timeframe for this. This hospital was opened with high expectations six years ago, but has disappointed because of poor management and severe overcrowding. I hope that the right measures are taken to speedily cut the high rate of avoidable maternal and baby deaths. Statement by Jack Bloom MPL, DA Gauteng Shadow Health MEC, 28 November 2019