NC loses R74 million in grant money 26 November 2019 Northern Cape municipalities are R74 million poorer after their inability to spend the Regional Bulk Infrastructure Grant (RBIG) has seen National Treasury redistribute these funds to other provinces. Among the affected municipalities are Richtersveld (lost R21,782 million); Nama Khoi (lost R170 000); Ubuntu (lost R13, 970 million); Emthanjeni (lost R6,991 million); Renosterberg (lost R592 000); Siyathemba (lost R5,948 million); !Kai !Garib (lost R10 million); Tsantsabane (lost R7,229 million) and Dawid Kruiper (lost R43,632 million). Of the R110,315 million lost to these municipalities, an amount of R35,960 million has been redistributed to Siyancuma (R10,460 million); Dikgatlong (R9,500 million) and Magareng (R16 million). The net effect is a total loss of R74,35 million, which is reallocated to other provinces. This is a massive blow to the Northern Cape and an absolute indictment of municipal management and provincial government, which is failing to effectively oversee local government. The RBIG is used to finance development of regional bulk water infrastructure and regional bulk sanitation collections, as well as regional water and wastewater works. Many of the municipalities affected by the grant cut, such as Ubuntu, are experiencing critical infrastructure induced water shortages, not to mention sewerage overflows. This money could therefore have gone a long way to effecting the necessary maintenance and upgrades required to reduce the suffering of residents, who face water cuts and sewerage spills on a daily basis. This is not the first time that Northern Cape municipalities have lost out on much needed funding due to their own incompetence. Last financial year, the Municipal Infrastructure Grants (MIG) of 18 municipalities were reduced due to underperformance. Funding was subsequently also redistributed to three better performing municipalities. The question that arises is to whom are we leaving this critical function of grant management? Municipalities, which we all know the majority are simply incapable of managing their budgets, are being left to their own mercy. In the end, by punishing dire mismanagement of municipal managers, it is actually the residents of these municipalities who are being punished the most. Ultimately, by taking away funding, their desperate need for improved services is not diminished but rather aggravated. This is not fair to them. The DA has, in the past, requested regular Section 72 and month end reports, in order for the legislature to be able to monitor municipal spending. However, this has not been forthcoming. We will now seek clarity on how we failed, as a province, to retain this funding despite the fact that concerns were raised early on in respect of this impending reality. Clearly much more needs to be done to monitor the spending of municipal grants. As a collective, inclusive of municipalities, COGHSTA, National and Provincial Treasury and even the Department of Water and Sanitation, need to own their share of the poor performance of municipalities. It is also essential that early warning systems are put in place so that interventions can be instituted timeously, before it is too late and before the money is lost. Improved grant management is not just another administrative function, instead it is in the direct interests of creating a better life for all the people of the Northern Cape. Issued by Fawzia Rhoda, DA Constituency Head of Bo-Karoo, 26 November 2019