15. The EFF's response to Andre Ruyters appointment as Eskom CEO: The EFF rejects the anti-transformation and racist appointment of Eskom's new CEO, Andre de Ruyter, and we are disgusted by the continued obliteration of Africans in key state-owned enterprises. The appointment of Ruyter is irrational, shameful, a clear demonstration of deliberate intent to collapse Eskom to rationalise privatisation of South Africa's most important strategic assets at the hands of people, and does not come as a surprise. His appointment is part of a racist project led by Pravin Gordhan to undermine Africans. 14. Cyril Ramaphosa in his weekly letter explaining how, as a matter of deep and profound principle, the ANC government is both for and against race domination, and for and against non-racialism: We knew that we had to build a truly united nation, not merely to replace domination by one with domination by another. Non-racialism is not the product of a negotiated compromise, but is a fundamental pillar of the new society we are building. It is only through advancing non-racialism that we will be able to reconstruct the fabric of our society and narrow social and economic divisions and build a new democratic society from the ashes of the old that had destroyed the potential of our country. It is a principle we will not abandon. *** At the same time we also recognise the ‘unfinished business’ of nation-building: which is overcoming the deep divisions that apartheid created in our society. That is why redress continues to be a crucial pillar of government policy, whether it is in land reform, employment equity or in economic transformation. Although we have come a long way since 1994, the occasional expressions of racial and ethnic chauvinism shows that many in our society have yet to overcome what Joe Slovo once termed the ‘psychological barrier’ towards true non-racialism. *** Since 1994, we have actively sought to drive transformation through affirmative action and our broad-based black economic empowerment policies, through preferential procurement and initiatives like the Black Industrialists programme. Within government itself, transformation of the public service to reflect this country’s demography has been critical. As we strive to rebuild the public service – including at our state-owned entities – it is our mission to appoint people who are capable, qualified, ethical and who embody the values of public service, whether they are black or white, men or women. ___STEADY_PAYWALL___ 13. Mmusi Maimane’s attack on those “racists” who seek to preserve exclusionary economic policy: I abhor racists, expecially of the ones whose fundememntal attitude is the preservation of exclusionary economic policy. Our primary objectives of OneSA4All will only be achieved when we are willing to confront the injustices suffered by SAfricans. Let’s build it together for all *** 12. Ferial Haffajee conjuring up of a “New Right” label out of thin air: Comment: The New Right. To Hermann Pretorius and Ernst Roets, you could add Gwen Ngwenya, John Steenhuisen. Race-blind (although they claim not to be), of a still nascent ideology, newby practitioners of the ideals of non-racialism (although they have no idea of its genesis). To which Gwen Ngwenya replied as follows: Ferial I think you are a lovely person but a shoddy analyst. Let me list the reasons why, and only because you decided to prod me while I was minding my own business.First: you are ignorant of the history of bipartisan opposition against race-based policies. https://t.co/TX1xj5aCnz 11. Jan-Jan Joubert on how “whites” should and should not behave in South Africa: It’s a strange phenomenon, this aversion to listening on the part of many whites. I regularly come across it. They just want to talk and tell everybody their opinions. On hearing I have good access to and a blessed relationship with the EFF, many whites are quick to tell me what they think I should say to the party. What they don’t seem to consider for even a moment is that I am enriched by listening to the EFF, not by preaching to them. It’s only through listening that one gains an understanding of anything. From an extract from Jan-Jan Joubert’s new book, as published in the Daily Maverick. 10. Ismail Lagardien in the Daily Maverick on the return of Gwen Ngwenya as DA policy chief: "Nevertheless, the new DA 2.0, now increasingly being captured by the classical liberals, would defend the most egregious of capitalism’s iniquities with claims that 5,000 years ago we did not have flushing toilets and now we have smartphones – so “shut up!” and don’t complain about inequality or patriarchy. They would insist, also, that meritocracy would solve all the problems in a country wracked for nigh on 400 years by the structural and somatic violence of European colonialism (which the British historian JM Roberts described as an “assault on the world”), settler colonialism and apartheid." 9. Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng’s lecture on transformative constitutionalism: We have to “give practical expression to the injustices of the past”. And anybody who says, please stop blaming it on apartheid and colonialism is being mischievous. What we cannot do is to blame it all on colonialism and apartheid, but most of the problems that we have to contend with right now are a direct consequence of colonialism and apartheid. It is therefore absolutely necessary that we never stop talking about colonialism and its sister neo-colonialism, and apartheid, because then, you leave those who have always believed in this crime against humanity to be comfortable and to shape it in a sophisticated way, in such a way that it doesn’t quite look like discrimination, when in fact, it is. We will be betraying the legacy of Madiba if we don’t give practical expression to the injustices of our past and the question is what are those injustices? 8. Ralph Mathekga in News24 on “classical liberalism”: There is just one tiny problem for this classical liberal thinking. The truth is that the majority of people in South Africa unfortunately do not have access to opportunities and hence they cannot enjoy certain rights irrespective of how the classical liberals insist on defending the system that seeks to propagate these unreachable rights. What's the point of insisting that people have a right to access certain rights when we know that they are not able to do so? This is similar to blaming the poor for failing to exercise their right to buy a car. This is senseless, and so is the idea of classical liberalism at this point in time. 7. The thoughts of NUMSA GS Irvin Jim on all matters race-related: J Steenhiaen of DA propangandist is for racist legacy of Toney Leon and Zille if he doubts he must go and ask Maimane, Confused Mashaba and he is just being used to help extreme right wingers in politics who thinks that blaks and Africans don’t deserve to own the SA Economy? *** My message to comrade Jessie Duarte the only way to deliver a society free of racism, free of patriarch and non sexist is to affirm the African majority blacks and Africans into ownership contro of the economy through nationalization such will change power relations. 6. Former Joburg Mayor Herman Mashaba’s intemperate responses to his IRR critics: This young man was brought up in a highly racist family that religiously believed that Blacks are inferior to him and his race. I can't help him https://t.co/jo48JRu9Md *** My personal experience is that a big number of our White compatriots are normal good South Africans, but we need to be vigilant against the few core racists who want to hold us ransom, telling us Race is irrelevant https://t.co/Sh5u9OVPsX *** 5. Prince Mashele writing in the Sowetan on Helen Zille: "That will be the final judgment of history on Zille: a stubborn white woman who showed the middle finger to black people in her last senile days on Earth. Indeed, she is too old to redeem herself. History manifests through personalities. Just as Hendrik Verwoerd has become the face of apartheid, Zille has availed herself as a latter-day spokesperson of colonialism. A diabolical leader lends a diabolical face to his or her organisation and society. Such is the wider realm in which the toxicity of Zille's ill-advised return to politics exerts its fullest impact." 4. Academic Christi van der Westhuizen on the “white denialism” of liberals in the DA: "For many people who live the experience of being racialised as “black” in the world, it is impossible to negate the effects of race – both negatively, as a system of oppression, and positively, as a source of resistance and identity. As Maimane put it poignantly, "if you don’t see I’m black, you don’t see me. These views ran head-long into the DA’s historical white denialism, sparking an intense political battle for the party’s soul. Hence, when Steenhuisen talks about the “slavish race-based obsession of the last few years”, he is sniping at black leaders’ attempt to turn the party away from its legacy of race-blindness." 3. The Afrikaans-speaking academic Jonathan Jansen complaining about being addressed in Afrikaans in Stellenbosch: This morning in a bookshop in Stellenbosch:Me: Good morningShe: Waarmee kan ek help?Me: I need stationeryShe: Is jy die Prof van die Vrystaat?Me: No, I'm DJ Black Coffee (now you know why black people sometimes flip because of language intolerance) 2. The response by Panyaza Lesufi, Gauteng MEC for Education to AfriForum’s call for his removal from his portfolio: I would rather be the enemy of @afriforum than democracy and non racialism. I despise racism and will least expect racists to love me. I hate racism with a passion but I am addicted to non racialism! *** The day racists praise you, you must know the revolution is lost! My only plea to racists please don’t harm my kids and my family, as for me you are free to do as you wish.I know you attempted on various occasions to harm and attack me. I’m unsinkable ✊🏿#AfriforumFF+SolidarityIRR pic.twitter.com/fFwzyJCyq9 1. EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi on all matters Springbok related: Aggg please, today is England vs. England. I mean during 2010 World Cup the settlers had both flags in their homes & cars. It’s a win win for them because they are still England at heart! You should be focused on removing apartheid statuesNna am watching @KaizerChiefs #Andizi https://t.co/eqkrMwsqhS *** I hope Ramaphosa puts Siya in his plane when he comes back home. When the colony of England losses the kith & keen are going to unleash frustration on him. Please, we must unite behind Siya when the English colony looses. *** Congratulations to #SiyaKolisi... the rest go get your congratulations from Prince Harry *** She adds that why is unity important only so that we can celebrate a white dominated #SpringboksChampions? Why is there no unity when blacks have to get the land back, or on transformation in the Banks. Why is there no unity when blacks have to share the wealth of the country!