EFF condemns Mbeki's call for action to be taken against Zindzi Mandela 23 June 2019 The EFF condemns former President Thabo Mbeki's call for action to be taken against South African Ambassador to Denmark, Zindzi Mandela. This is following her twitter comments that white people are beneficiaries of stolen land. President Thabo Mbeki confesses not to know what the actual twitter comments of Zindzi Mandela were. However, because of an uncontrollable appetite to appear as a paragon of correctness, he still provides comments. Essentially, the former president comments on things happening on the ground which he has no knowledge of, true to his aloof self. Mama Zindzi Mandela correctly made the observation that white people in South Africa are beneficiaries of stolen land. That in essence, black people do not need the consent of white people to take back their land. This is because, even by international law, colonialism is an unforgivable crime against humanity. The genuine leap of faith by black people to avoid the path of vengeance and punitive justice has however been repaid by 25 years of continued refusal of recognition by white people. White South Africans refuse to recognize blacks as rightful owners of the land and subject themselves to a constitutional and peaceful land reform process dictated to by black people. Of all people who must deny Zindzi Mandela to voice this frustration is former President Mbeki. This is because as president of South Africa he failed with flying colors to resolve the land question. In fact he paid no passionate and consistent attention on it as he did the neoliberal restricting of the state. Mbeki also seems to not be retreating his assault of the Winnie Mandela household. What was wrong with him just saying he has no knowledge of what Zindzi Mandela said? He could not say this because the Winnie Mandela household must always be put to its place: a place of docility. We refuse and stand with Zindzi Mandela. She is not only right, she represents a genuine cry of many generations of African people who want to call this country their own. They are unable to do so because the colonial dispossession of their land has not been corrected by, among others, President Mbeki. Issued by Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, National Spokesperson, EFF, 23 June 2019