Minister Lindiwe Sisulu calls on municipalities to prioritise maintenance of water and sanitation infrastructure 23 June 2019 The Minister of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Lindiwe Sisulu has called on all municipalities to prioritize maintenance of water and sanitation infrastructure to prevent pollution of dams and rivers. The Minister made the call after receiving a briefing from the Acting Director General of Water and Sanitation, Squire Mahlangu on the situation of water shortage being experienced by the town of Mahikeng in the North West Province. The Minister has directed the Acting DG to submit a national report on the state of water and sanitation infrastructure and the maintenance programme by municipalities. “We want to understand the state of our water and sanitation infrastructure, we want to work with municipalities to ensure that there is ongoing maintenance and modernalisation of infrastructure to avoid pollution”, Sisulu said. The Minister also directed the Acting DG to submit a report on funding allocated to municipalities and expenditure trends to discuss with Premiers and Mayors. “The Department of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation must grow capacity to monitor all our sources of water, dams and rivers, focussing on maintenance and prevention of pollution; modern technology and a strong inspectorate should be able to assist us”, Sisulu said. On the Mahikeng water situation, the Minister has directed Deputy Minister David Mahlobo to lead a team to come up with urgent measures to address the water disruption in the area. The Minister also received an update on the work of Gift of the Givers in assisting the Amathole District Municipality to address its water shortage with new boreholes. The Minister welcomed the partnership for the benefit of the community. “I am happy that all the challenges have been resolved and Gift of the Givers and the Municipality have started providing new boreholes, as water is important for daily use. Going forward we will have to work with the Municipality on a long term plan of water management, maintenance and modernization of the infrastructure, but we have started”, Sisulu concluded. The Minister will announce more measures to address maintenance of infrastructure, prevention of dams and river pollution in her budget vote speech scheduled for 16 July 2019. Issued by Ndivhuwo Mabaya on behalf of Department of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, 23 June 2019