Armed robbers target Sea Point High School 6 June 2019 I am informed that two armed men entered the premises of Sea Point High School on Wednesday (5th June 2019) It is reported that the alleged perpetrators assaulted an educator with a gun and made off with 50 cell phones. The educator has sustained an injury to her face and is seeking medical attention. SAPS and the WCED’s Safe Schools were contacted. The WCED’s Specialised Support directorate has been informed and the school has a school counsellor and a psychologist on site for learners who require support and counselling. It is reported that the suspects gained access to the school over the fence. The school has a security guard and CCTV cameras and we hope that the SAPS will use the camera footage to identify the suspects and ensure they face the full might of the law. I have also requested that this case be added to the Watching Brief Lists and my office has already made contact with the Sea Point SAPS. I am genuinely concerned that criminals have become so brazen that they enter school premises on a busy road, in broad day light, and that not even a strong security presence, CCTV footage or fencing serve as a deterrent. Our schools are meant to be places of safety where learners and educators feel secure and where they can realise their potential and develop the skills and values they need to lead successful lives. I therefore condemn this act in the strongest terms. School Safety still remains one of our greatest challenges and as the education department, we do all that we can to protect our schools. However, we need the SAPS to play their part and I therefore call on the National Government to provide the current seriously under-capacitated  police stations with the resources they need to help us protect our schools. I am again appealing to the communities around our schools to report any suspicious activity to the SAPS or our Safe Schools IMMEDIATELY. This action could save a life. Our Safe Schools Call Centre can be reached on 0800 45 46 47. I also urge anyone with information on Wednesday’s robbery to please contact the SAPS, so that the perpetrators can be arrested. Issued by Jessica Shelver, Spokesperson for Minister Debbie Schafer, 6 June 2019