DA Shadow Cabinet will set the alternative for a better SA 13 June 2019 Today the DA’s Shadow Cabinet for the 6th Parliament officially met for the first time since its appointment. The purpose of the meeting was for the DA Leader, Mmusi Maimane, to outline his vision, his objectives and guidelines for the work of the Shadow Cabinet ahead of it’s work in the 6th Parliament. Guided by the vision of building a moderate, nonracial centre that builds One South Africa for All, the Shadow Cabinet has been tasked with: 1. Putting forward strong, credible policy alternatives; 2. Holding the Executive accountable, but equally supporting the Executive when it works in the interests of the people; 3. Jobs, opportunities and the economy must take centre focus; and 4. Taking the work we do in Parliament to communities. The Shadow Cabinet has been tasked to focus on the DA's Agenda for Reform noting the need for urgent economic reform. The Shadow Cabinet has been tasked to use Parliament to table our Jobs Bill and Cheaper Energy Bill, focus on city-led economic growth, fight for labour legislation reform, oppose any changes to the Reserve Bank independence and mandate, propose alternatives to the current State Owned Entity (SOE) ownership framework, propose alternatives to the current Mining Charter, and oppose threats to the economy and fiscus such as NHI and expropriation of property and land without compensation. The Shadow Cabinet will sit every fortnight to discuss the upcoming legislative agenda; to deliberate on new policies, debates, and motions; and to table any other matters of national importance. Shadow Cabinet noted the statement by the Presidency on the Public Protector’s investigation against President Cyril Ramaphosa’s Bosasa scandal, this is nothing more than a delay tactic to frustrate the investigation and release of the final report. We eagerly wait for the final report which must be tabled with the Speaker of Parliament. It is high time that Presidents’ who mislead Parliament are held to account to the fullest might of the law. We have also noted today’s announcement stating that Deputy President David Mabuza has been appointed Leader of Government Business (LOGB). This is an important position, which is responsible for among other things, ensuring that Members of the Executive, including the President, account to Parliament. The DA Leader will in the coming weeks, write to the LOGB to schedule a meeting so as to outline the Party’s approach to the Executive. We are on track to effectively start our work as the Official Opposition, contribute to making our nation prosper and help build One South Africa for All. Issued by Solly Malatsi, DA Shadow Minister in the Presidency, 13 June 2019