Economy is paying the price for ANC declaring war against South Africa 4 June 2019 It is shocking to see how quickly South Africa's economy is going downhill and yet it should come as no surprise seeing as the ANC has basically declared war against South Africa with its poor economic policy and its interference in the economy. The economic growth rate of -3,2% for the first quarter of this year, which was released by Statistics South Africa (SSA) this morning, is shocking nonetheless. The ANC's declaration of war against the country became evident with the stricter measures relating to Black Economic Empowerment (BEE) and Affirmative Action (AA). In addition to that, factors like state capture, a high crime rate and proposed expropriation without compensation created the perfect storm that caused severe damage to the country's economy. This is the reason why foreign investors are staying away. The ANC has, thus, also declared war against traditional foreign trade partners like the European Union (EU) and America. South Africa is not getting the investments it needs because investors have lost all confidence in the ANC to manage the economy. The damage will require great expertise and a lot of hard work to rectify it and the FF Plus is convinced that the ANC is not a party that is able to accomplish that. It is shocking to see how much agricultural production has decreased as well. This is a direct result of the ANC's scorched earth policy regarding agriculture. There seems to be no motivation whatsoever to combat farm murders. The FF Plus has been advocating the necessity of establishing, among other things, special units to prevent brutal farm attacks and murders for a long time already. The government has, however, offered the agricultural sector no real support; quite the contrary, the sector was targeted even further by the notion of expropriation without compensation. It is, therefore, no surprise that the ANC's destructive policy also damaged this sector. Clearly the ANC is a ruthless organisation that has absolutely no regard for the fate of South Africa and its people and it is not interested in implementing policy that would allow a free market where the economy can flourish. The ANC is only looking out for itself and its card-carrying members. The rest of the people in South Africa will continue to suffer, regardless of their skin colour. The only solution to this problem is to get rid of the ANC, because there is no way that the ANC will or can turn itself around to save our country. The public must, for the sake of survival, join hands and cooperate with the FF Plus to isolate the ANC and other parties with leftist policies so that the right parties can form a coalition and govern the country so as to turn things around and get South Africa on the road to recovery. Statement issued by Adv. Anton Alberts, FF Plus chairperson, 4 June 2019