Waterfall Management statement update: Waterfall employee vs. NPA Waterfall Management Company Pty (Ltd) All charges withdrawn against Mr. Irving Steyn of Waterfall Management Company Pty (Ltd) 7 June 2019; Waterfall Management Company Pty (Ltd) can confirm that the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) today withdrew all charges against Mr. Irving Steyn in connection with alleged illegal water meter connections at Waterfall. Mr. Steyn was arrested and detained on 30 May 2018 on charges of fraud, theft and corruption but was released on bail on 31 May 2018. “I am pleased that these very serious charges against Mr. Steyn have at last been withdrawn. We have always maintained his innocence and believed the allegations against him to be false,” says Willie Vos, CEO of Waterfall Management Company Pty (Ltd). “Mr. Steyn has conducted himself with the utmost professionalism and the highest ethical standards and provided his full co-operation during this investigation. In fact, our own internal investigations, which were concluded almost a year ago, readily and conclusively established that he was in no way involved in, or connected with, these allegations.” “Mr. Steyn and his family have been subjected to a protracted and agonising ordeal which was not of their own making. He remains in the employ of Waterfall.” “In the ongoing investigation of this matter, Waterfall Management Company will continue to cooperate with the authorities and update all stakeholders as and when appropriate,” adds Vos. Waterfall Management Company (Pty) Ltd will continue working with the City of Johannesburg on plans to rectify any illegal water meters and to resolve all issues relating thereto. About Waterfall Management Company Waterfall Management Company is the Property and Asset Management Company of the Waterfall land. Since 2004, Waterfall Management Company has been working with developers and investors to create the largest mixed-use development in Africa. This award-winning 2,200-hectare leasehold development in the heart of Gauteng, offers integrated, fibre-ready live-work-play environments that provide unsurpassed quality of life in a vibrant urban environment. Issued by: Waterfall Management Company, 7 June 2019