WCPP elects SCOPA and committee chairpersons 04 June 2019 Today, 04 June 2019, the Western Cape Provincial Parliament constituted all relevant standing committees, and elected committee chairpersons to formally establish the legislature’s oversight function over the Western Cape government in South Africa’s Sixth Parliament. The following members of Provincial Parliament have been elected to serve as committee chairpersons: Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Lulama Mvimbi (ANC) – The DA offered the chairpersonship of this committee to the official opposition as we believe this is in line with good democratic practice. The ANC nominated Lulama Mvimbi to the position which the DA supported. Premier and Constitutional Matters: Ricardo Mackenzie (DA) - Ricardo previously served as the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Cultural Affairs and Sports. He has worked for, among others, the Presidency, Old Mutual Bank, and JPMorgan Chase Investment Bank. He is Mitchell’s Plain Constituency Head and holds a Graduate Certificate in Governance and Leadership from Wits University where he is also pursuing a Post Graduate Diploma in Governance. Finance, Economic Opportunities, and Tourism: Deidre Baartman (DA) - Baartman holds an LLB Degree from the University of Stellenbosch, and is currently completing her Masters in Constitutional Law at the University of South Africa. She was admitted as an Advocate of the Western Cape High Court in 2017, following which she served as the political assistant to the DA Chief Whip at the National Assembly. Agriculture, Environmental Affairs and Development Planning: Andricus Van der Westhuizen (DA) - Andricus was first elected as a councillor in Franschhoek in 1999, after which he was elected as speaker of Stellenbosch Municipality in 2000 and again in 2006. He served two terms as a member of the National Assembly. Education: Lorraine Botha (DA) - Lorraine has been a permanent member of the Education committee during the full term of the Fifth Parliament. She has also been the Committee Chairperson for the Department of the Premier from 2014 to 2016, and as of 2016 she served as the Committee Chairperson for Social Development and Health. Her work experience lies in youth development, youth at risk, youth in conflict with the law, as well as learner support in schools. Health: Wendy Philander (DA) - Wendy Philander was previously a ward and PR Councillor in the Drakenstein Municipality. She also served as MMC for Human Settlements and Social Services.  A dynamic woman with an activist approach, Wendy seeks to address the day-to-day health challenges across the province. Social Development: Gillion Bosman (DA) - Gillion served as the Executive Director for Youth and Poverty in the City of Cape Town, as well as a councillor. He worked extensively in community development both in South Africa and abroad. Gillion is a Mandela Washington Fellow and holds a degree in Political Science and Public Administration from the University of Cape Town. Transport & Public Works: Daylin Mitchell (DA) - Sworn in as the youngest ever member of the Fifth Parliament, Mitchell chaired the Standing Committee for the Premier & Constitutional Matters, and Petitions during the previous term. He hails from the Karoo town of Beaufort West and was elected Deputy Chief Whip for the Majority Party on the 22 May 2019. Local Government: Derrick America (DA) - Derrick served as a councillor in the City of Cape Town where he chaired the Corporate Services committee. He also served as CCMA commissioner presiding over mediation and arbitration processes. In 2014, Derrick was elected as a member of the National Assembly. He holds a BCom (Honours) and an MBA. Human Settlements: Matlhodi Maseko (DA) - During the Fifth Parliament, Maseko served as the Chairperson for the Human Settlements Committee. Before taking her oath of office as a Member of the Western Cape Provincial Parliament, Maseko previously occupied the position of Project Coordinator in the Housing Department for Cederberg Municipality before being elected a PR Councillor in this municipality in 2012. Community Safety, Cultural Affairs and Sports: Reagen Allen (DA) - Reagen holds qualifications in Public Relations and Paralegal Studies and is a DA Young Leaders Graduate. He trained at the Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom in Germany while serving as the DA Youth National Media and Publicity Chair. In 2012, he was named a Global Shaper by the World Economic Forum for his contribution towards community development and society at large. Petitions Gillion Bosman (DA). Parliamentary Oversight Committee: Mireille Wenger (DA) - Chief Whip of the majority party, Wenger holds two Masters Degrees, an MA in International Studies and an MPhil in Criminology, Law and Society.  She also has a diploma in Political Science and Sociology from the Institut d'études politiques (Sciences Po’) in France. Deputy Chief Whip, Daylin Mitchell will be chairing the Conduct Committee, and Deidre Baartman will be chairing the Budget Committee. We look forward to working with members of Provincial Parliament to ensure transparency and accountability within the Western Cape government over the next five years. I trust that as a multiparty house, the Western Cape Provincial Parliament will continue to ensure that we provide the best possible governance to the people of this province. Statement issued by Mireille Wenger, MPP, DA Chief Whip, Western Cape Provincial Parliament, 4 June 2019