ANC statement on the inhumane actions by the DA/EFF alliance to displace the people of Alexandra 1 June 2019 The African National Congress (ANC) has noted the inhumane actions by the unholy DA/EFF alliance to irresponsibly demolish informal settlement and evict innocent people in a section of Alexander township. The actions of the DA/EFF alliance smacks of opportunism and cheap electioneering to displace our African masses exposing them to the harsh conditions of the winter cold weather. It remains our considered view that this alliance will forever be an accident of history founded on the grounds of greed and malicious "community of property", no right thinking political organisation can use the plight of our people to further narrow objectives. As a humane movement, we are encouraged by the actions of the ANC-led administration in Gauteng Province to intervene and restore the dignity of our people. The newly formed ANC led Government under Premier David Makhura will be providing immediate relief to displace families by providing temporary shelter for them. This It is a sad day that the DA/EFF chooses to inflict pain to the lives of the people of Alexandra by destroying their shelters and putting the lives of people at risk. We are under no illusion that this DA/EFF alliance have started electioneering in the area and are desperate to be seen to be doing something by destroying the very same lives of people whose votes they want. The ANC condemns the action of DA/EFF for the demolition of houses that they are carrying out in Alexandra. This unholy alliance has been unleashing the blood-thirsty Red Ants and the Metro Police on innocent residents. The DA/EFF coalition in Alexandra has consistently demonstrated their disregard for the plight and rights of the people of Alexandra. What is happening in Alexandra is no co-incidence. It is part of the programme of the DA/EFF alliance who see poor communities as voting fodder, but immediately relegate them to the periphery when it comes to development and service delivery. The ANC urges the DA/EFF alliance, even at this late hour, to immediately suspend their programme of callous brutality against defenceless residents of Alexandra. Issued by ANC, 1 June 2019