DA calls for tightened security at schools following KZN teacher shooting 11 June 2019 The Democratic Alliance in KwaZulu-Natal is deeply disturbed by the shooting of a teacher at a school in Folweni, south of Durban, earlier this morning. According to reports, an unknown man allegedly entered the school property and fired several shots at a 48-year-old male educator. The man was declared dead at the scene. The DA extends its sincere condolences to the family and friends of the deceased and also to those within the school community who were witness to such a horrific incident. This tragic occurrence has once again highlighted the breakdown in proper security at many KZN schools. While most do have some form of security, the standard of protection often leaves much to be desired, placing both staff and learners at risk. The DA has seen this time and again during its oversight inspections of KZN’s schools. It is critical that anybody who is not recognized as someone working at or attending the school is stopped and searched. Clearly this did not take place this morning. The DA will today write to KZN Education MEC, Khwazi Mshengu to request that he undertake a full security audit of the provinces schools, the findings of which must be presented to KZN’s Education portfolio committee within the next three months. We will also request that he turn his attention to the fact that, in some instances, school governing bodies (SGB’s) appear to be entering into security contracts or employing guards without the necessary vetting or the required training. This has to be stopped and the MEC needs to notify all SGB’s of the need to ensure that security is properly assessed before being appointed. In the event that this is not done, it is SGB’s who must be held answerable if anything goes wrong. The DA remains committed to ensuring that KZN’s schools are safe environments where both teaching and learning can take place. Issued by Imran Keeka, DA KZN Spokesperson on Education, 11 June 2019