Disgraced former Minister Bathablie Dlamini has another criminal case to answer for 14 June 2019 In her resignation letter on Tuesday, former Social Development Minister, Bathabile Dlamini, claimed that she was aware of wives of ANC members who were allegedly involved in dubious relationships with Cash Paymaster Services (CPS). In the letter she stated that “[those] that made profit through CPS by their wives are known but because they are respected by the organisation nothing is being said to them." In terms of Section 34 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act any person who holds a position of authority and suspects or knows of another person who have committed corruption should report the offence to the police. Failure to do so is an offence. The Democratic Alliance (DA) is of the view that Dlamini, a person of authority due to being the political head of a National Department, in this instance the Department of Social Development, had knowledge of corrupt activities related to the ANC and CPS and is therefore complicit in these crimes. Her silence on this crime is a crime in itself and she must be held fully accountable for her actions. Dlamini was ultimately tasked with protecting and serving the poor and vulnerable within our society and this makes her silence on this alleged corruption despicable. On 3 October 2018, the DA laid perjury charges against Dlamini following the Constitutional Court judgment requesting the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) to consider whether she should be prosecuted for lying under oath during her testimony at the Judge Bernard Ngoepe Inquiry into the social grants crisis. We will be writing to the National Police Commissioner, General Khehla John Sitole, in  the next 14 days requesting an update on these charges. The ball is now in SAPS’ court to deal with the former Minister and investigate her without fear or favour. For far too long, Bathabile Dlamini, protected by Jacob Zuma and her allies, got away with evading accountability and the DA will ensure that she finally gets their day in court. Issued by Bridget Masango MP - DA Shadow Minister of Social Development, 14 June 2019