#SONA2019: SA requires more than hope, we require economic growth The IFP expects of President Cyril Ramaphosa to ramp up growth in the economy, create jobs and stabilise SOEs. As we indicated when the president was elected, that when he does the right thing, we will support him. The State of the Nation Address which he will deliver tomorrow requires tangible action on job creation and economic growth due to sluggish growth and policy uncertainty. South Africa’s economy shrank by a shocking 3.2% in the first quarter of 2019, the largest decline seen since the global financial crisis 10 years ago. South Africa right now can ill-afford more talk shops and summits on the economy, what we need is for the President to be signing more investment deals with foreign nations and to ensure the stability of all our financial institutions, more specifically the Reserve Bank. We need to address the SOE question, by exploring the possibility of public-private partnerships. We are all in agreement that small businesses are the backbone of our economy and we require of the President to make pronouncements in this regard that will see the strengthening, capacitation and training of future business leaders within the small to medium enterprise sector. Crime is tearing our country apart, tearing families apart and crippling our collective efforts as South Africans to work together in ensuring that our loved ones, friends and families can function in a safe environment, free of crime, gangsterism, drugs and sophisticated crime syndicates. We expect the President to be tough on crime. The IFP will lend its support in this regard to ensure that millions of our people feel and are safe in our country. Transportation and transport infrastructure is directly linked to a growing economy and it is our hope that the President will make this one of his top priorities in getting our people to work and moving our country forward. Far too many South Africans rely on unstable and unregulated transport means to get to and from work to their homes. This we hope will be addressed by the President. Furthermore, President Ramaphosa must also clamp down on corruption and those implicated in these offences must be charged. The IFP is concerned about executives resigning in SOEs. President Ramaphosa must look into the situation at Eskom, as it is a grave risk to the economy, the financial affairs at the state broadcaster and management affairs at South African Airways. This state of the nation address must be all about the economy. President Ramaphosa should put South Africa first before addressing qualms within the ANC and its alliances partners. We need an economic wonder to push our country forward. The IFP expects the President to address all factors relating to the direct economy and all indirect factors with vigour during his address to the nation tomorrow. Issued by Mkhuleko Hlengwa, National Spokesperson, IFP, 19 June 2019