Portfolio Committee Chairpersons - all the bad apples in one basket 25 June 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West is disappointed, but not surprised at the failing ANC’s Portfolio Committee Chairpersons that were nominated and announced earlier today. In a shocking move, the ANC roped in Freedom Front (FF) Plus to support the appointment of these dubious individuals to chair the Portfolio Committees. Apart from being in cahoots with the FF Plus, the appointment particularly of the following chairpersons, proves that the ANC is as strong as their weakest links: Aaron Motswana (Premier, Finance, Cooperative Governance) He was recently voted out as mayor with a motion of no confidence supported by his own ANC councillors at Mamusa Local Municipality. It is shocking that a person of this calibre would be selected to chair a committee after being implicated in the VBS Mutual Bank saga. Under his watch R200 million earmarked for services to the people, was squandered on a failed investment. In the face of allegations of corruption, he will now be responsible for chairing a committee that oversees the performance of three critical departments under administration and their entities. Kim Medupe (Community Safety and Transport and Public Works) The former Mayor of Kgetlengrivier Municipality, appeared in court in 2015 on charges of assault. Her tenure as mayor had been riddled with service delivery protests and she will now be responsible for chairing a committee that oversees the departments that have recently been implicated at the State Capture Commission of Inquiry. Bitsa Lenkopane (Economic Development, Environment and Tourism) Despite the ANC’s stance that those with criminal records will not be permitted as Members of Parliament, Lenkopane still made it to the North West Provincial Legislature. She will now also be chairing a committee overseeing the departments that form the economic backbone of the province. It is indeed shocking that not even two criminal records of assault and fraud respectively and another ongoing case relating to an accident with a state vehicle under shady circumstances, could keep her from a position of power. Kabelo Mataboge (Education, Arts, Culture, Sports and Recreation) Being in the wrong faction got him suspended as ANC North West Secretary for three years following a guilty plea on charges of prejudicing the integrity and repute of the ANC by impeding its activities and undermining its effectiveness as an organisation. We believe that appointing corrupt looters, convicted criminals and those involved in factionalism, points to the fact that the ANC rewards misconduct and lacks to political will to hold guilty cadres accountable. The ANC is clearly not serious about clean governance and the DA will keep a watchful eye on all Chairpersons of Portfolio Committees. We are committed to exercising our oversight role by continuing to keep the ANC accountable for poor governance. Issued by Freddy Sonakile, DA North West Chief Whip, 25 June 2019