Alexandra Renewal Project – MEC Maile’s comments are premature and misguided 24 June 2019 I have taken note of reports of comments made by MEC for Human Settlement, Urban Planning and COGTA, Lebogang Maile, in respect of suspected corruption said to have taken place in Alexandra in respect of the Alexandra Renewal Project (ARP). Maile would have the residents of this City and Alexander believe that no corruption had taken place within the ARP. Indeed, the MEC has bizarrely elected to make such a pronouncement whilst there are on-going investigations which a revealing concerning evidence of corruption which undermined efforts to bring development to the residents of Alexandra. One can only see the MEC’s comments as a misguided attempt to cover-up the truth behind this corruption. The challenges faced by residents in Alexandra are substantial and the people of Alexandra deserve answers as to what became of the development which was promised by the ANC through the Alexandra Renewal Project (ARP). Indeed, the City’s Group Forensic Investigation Services has received information that the ARP, which was launched in 2001, served as a slush fund for the ANC, the City of Johannesburg under previous governments and the Provincial Government. ANC members were employed to drive the ARP in Alexandra. From the information we have received, their task was to direct funding to ANC-aligned companies that under-delivered on housing and channelled money back to the ANC. There can be no question that the money set aside to bring development to Alexandra has been looted. The time for accountability is now. The City of Johannesburg’s Group Forensic Investigation will continue to investigate this matter for the benefit of our residents. What has allegedly occurred here is a crime against the residents of Alexandra and the state, it can only be addressed through a criminal investigation. The multi-party government will continue to work towards working with the residents of Alex to bring much-needed development to the community. To date, we have invested in: - Electrification of 686 stands in informal settlements in Alexandra; - The extension of operating hours in the library serving Alexandra; - The opening of 2 new clinics in Alexandra (Rover Park and Thoko Nongoma) with a third to be opened in the coming weeks (4th Avenue); - The extending of clinic operating hours at the River Park Clinic; - The provision of substance abuse treatment facilities at the River Park Clinic; - R60 million over 3 years to complete the new Banakekelen Hospice and Clinic in Alexandra; - R20 million in 2018/19 which will begin the construction of the Alexandra Sports and Youth Development Safe Hub; - R80 million being spent in the 2018/19 financial year by Joburg Water on replacing water and sewer pipes in Alexandra; - The construction of the Joe Nhlanhla pedestrian bridge in the 2018/19 financial year; - The completion of the Alexandra Automotive Hub in 2018/19 as a job creation initiative in Alexandra; - The opening of Alexandra Opportunity Centre support to SMMEs in Alexandra; - The completion of the Jukskei Water Management Plan to protect people and property close to the Jukskei River in times of flooding; -  The installation of 100 new public lights in Alexandra; and - R20 million to be spent in 2018/19 on the improvement of the Helen Joseph Hostel in Alexandra. As the City of Johannesburg, we will continue to work to bring change to the people of Alexandra and to bring those who stolen from our residents to justice. Issued by Herman Mashaba, Executive Mayor, City of Johannesburg, 24 June 2019