DA calls on Premier Makhura to replicate Municipal Cost Containment Regulations 10 June 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) is calling on Premier David Makhura to implement the same austerity measures as those imposed on municipalities. The new cost saving measures will be enforced through the Municipal Cost Containment Regulations 2019. As of 1 July under this rule municipalities will be allowed to spend a maximum of R700 000 on any car meant for the use of its political office bearers. Before the vehicle purchased for political use can be replaced it must have at 120 000 kilometres on the clock unless there is a serious mechanical issue and is in poor condition. But this can only be done with a report from the dealer stating that a vehicle needs to be replaced. Furthermore, the use of consultants will also be limited, travelling for international meetings and events will be limited to only critical trips and only for officials directly involved in the subject. Officials will also be required to use public transport when travelling and the hiring of a car will only be allowed if it is the cheaper option. Overnight accommodation will also not be provided for travel of less than 250 kilometres. If these measures are replicated by the Gauteng Provincial Government it will drastically reduce fruitless and wasteful expenditure incurred by government departments. Millions of rands is constantly being wasted by government departments on unnecessary events and luxuries.  This money can this be used to invest in infrastructure that will help attract investors and in turn this will help to grow the economy. This will then create an enabling environment for the private sector to create more job opportunities for our unemployed youth. In addition, Premier Makhura should also implement a lifestyle audit for all government officials and political heads who are office bearers in government. If Makhura is serious about making Gauteng work and fighting corruption, then he will act by implementing a similar Municipal Cost Containment Regulation in the province. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Provincial Legislature Caucus Leader, 10 June 2019