DA welcomes historic service delivery-orientated agreement between City of Johannesburg and labour trade unions 20 August 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) welcomes the historic Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the City of Johannesburg and labour trade unions – the Independent Municipal and Allied Trade Union (IMATU) and the South African Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU) – announced by Mayor Herman Mashaba on Monday. This agreement, which seeks to achieve a strategic partnership between the City and labour trade unions, will foster mutual accountability and a healthy relationship between the City and labour unions. Once again, Mayor Mashaba and the multi-party administration of Johannesburg have shown political maturity to deliver change to the people of Johannesburg. When the DA-led administration took over the reins of South Africa’s economic hub, it inherited labour relations which were often volatile and disruptive. This historic agreement between the City and labour unions will go a long way in fostering peaceful and stable labour relations in the City and will provide employees with a conducive work environment. Most importantly, this MoU will bring, to the centre,  service delivery to the people of Johannesburg. Under the previous ANC-administration, disruptive strike action meant residents got the short end of the stick, as services were often delayed or worse, halted indefinitely. The MoU between the City and labour unions will establish the following framework: 1. Establish a partnership between IMATU, SAMWU and the City in the budget planning processes of government. 2. Drive performance management in the City in such a manner as to accelerate service delivery and generate a more conducive working environment for employees to serve residents. 3. Require IMATU, SAWMU and the City of Johannesburg to partner together in ensuring allegations of fraud and corruption are investigated and that requirements are in place to protect those who report wrongdoing. 4. Establish the principles of a labour relations environment that achieve greater levels of stability through an open-door policy, requirements to engage in good faith and from a problem-solving perspective. 5. Set out the requirements of a labour relations engagement framework which will provide the mechanisms to achieve stability in our labour relations. 6. Ensure that the City does not provide recognition to unrecognised trade unions as per the stipulations of the Labour Relations Act. Where the DA governs, we understand that a positive and constructive work environment is key in delivering services to residents. We, therefore, congratulate Mayor Mashaba on this landmark agreement. In almost three years, the Mashaba-administration has ensured that Johannesburg is working again. The ANC and its narrow political agenda are seeking to destabilise and destroy the positive work of Johnesburg’s multi-party administration. The DA calls on the people of Johannesburg to support Mayor Mashaba by signing a petition  to ensure that he can continue delivering quality services to the people of Johannesburg. Issued by Refiloe Nt’sekhe, DA National Spokesperson, 20 August 2019