Arrests of former MEC Nelson and HOD Lekalakala a drop in the ocean of North West Corruption 27 August 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West notes the recent arrests of former MEC of Finance, Wendy Nelson and Head of Department (HOD) of Health, Thabo Lekalakala, who both appeared before the Mmabatho Regional Court and are currently out on R20 000 bail each. Nelson, recently elected Treasurer of the ANC Interim Provincial Executive Committee, stands accused of being involved in the irregular appointment of HOD Lekalakala in 2014. Amid far worse cases of corruption allegedly committed by the Supra administration, it almost seems trivial that Nelson would be arrested for her role in the “irregular appointment” of an HOD. This highlights the factional battles between the Supra / Ramaphosa camps and once again exposes the fault lines within the ANC. Lekalakala, who is said to have signed the controversial R180 million contract with the Gupta-linked Mediosa mobile clinic company, allegedly paid over R30 million before any of the work has commenced. These arrests are the first of its kind in the North West, but more arrests need to follow. The Mediosa scandal is merely the tip of the iceberg, as we know that far more than R180 million was looted from this province during former premier, Supra Mahumapelo’s tenure. The North West Province has been plagued by corruption without a single politician being brought to book. This includes allegations that the Chairperson of the ANC Interim Provincial Executive Council, MEC Molapisi, as well as Premier, Job Mokgoro have been involved in corruption within the Department of Public Works, which came to light during the Zondo Commission Inquiry. This province is on its knees due to years of fraud, incompetence and misappropriation of funds. The DA will not be satisfied until the millions of Rands lost at the hands of the Supra administration is recovered. We call upon whistle blowers to come forward with evidence of the countless untold cases of corruption that robbed the people of services and a better life in order for justice to prevail. We will keep a close eye on developments. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Provincial Leader, 27 August 2019