#HandsoffMashaba: His only 'fault' is that he is a strong and capable leader 14 August 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has full confidence in City of Johannesburg Mayor Herman Mashaba’s ability to continue leading the people of Johannesburg, and his only 'fault' in the eyes of the ANC is that he is a strong and capable leader. It is shocking that the ANC wants to table a motion of no confidence in Mayor Mashaba when it is them that failed the residents of the city for more than two decades, depriving them of services. Change is not comfortable but it is necessary, and if anyone can bring that change in the City of Johannesburg, it is Mayor Mashaba. That is why we have seen countless of motions of no confidence against a man who is not afraid to act in the face of wrong doing. This is the third attempt by the ANC to bring down Mayor Mashaba in three years. All previous attempts to remove him in a no confidence vote in 2016 and 2017, have failed. It cannot be that a strong and capable leader like Mayor Mashaba gets punished for doing what is right. Under his leadership, Mayor Mashaba turned the city’s finances around, to currently the healthiest financial position it has ever been in. In fact, under the ANC administration 19% of the city's budget was stolen through corruption. Since taking over the DA-led City of Johannesburg, Mayor Mashaba has been working hard to remove the corrupt system the ANC left in the City of Johannesburg. Mayor Mashaba and his team have a duty to the people of Johannesburg who are entitled to excellent service delivery. More than 6659 title deeds have been delivered to residents across the city, giving them ownership of a home they can pass on to their children. 44 000 Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) job opportunities have been created, investment in the electrification of informal settlements has been tripled, extended operating hours have been extended at 22 clinics around the city and 1500 metro police officers have been recruited to assist in the fight against crime. Furthermore, the city's newly established corruption busting unit has recorded over 5335 cases worth more than R24 billion in transactions. We have also seen an increase in investments in Johannesburg's inner city from 5 billion to 16,355 billion to build affordable residential units and student accommodation. The DA calls on the people of Johannesburg to support Mayor Mashaba by signing the below petition to allow him to continue the fight against corruption and lootings that destroys lives rather than saves them. Please follow this link to view and sign the petition here. Only the DA can bring change that builds one South Africa for all. Issued by John Moodey, DA Gauteng Provincial Leader, 14 August 2019