ANC mourns the passing of anti-apartheid activist, Gavin Watson 26 August 2019 The African National Congress has received with shock the sad news on the passing of Cde Gavin Watson in a tragic car accident this morning. Cde Gavin Watson together with his brothers, Ronnie, Cheeky and Valence associated themselves with the struggle for liberation at an early age and fought side by side with many compatriots against apartheid. It was in his home province Of the Eastern Cape, where Cde Gavin Watson made the admirable and brave choice of disassociating himself with the privilege that came with being a white male in apartheid South Africa and choosing to participate actively in pursuing the ideals of a free, democratic and non-racial South Africa. The Watson brothers were well known activists in the United Democratic Front (UDF) and within the African National Congress underground structures at the time. To a large extent, their role in the fight for non-racial sports, especially Rugby, resulted in one of the most symbolic acts of opposition and discontent against discrimination in sport. Cde Gavin in particular, also played a significant role in providing support, through the family businesses, to many activists and operatives of uMkhonto weSizwe who were being pursued by the police and fleeing Port Elizabeth and the Eastern Cape as a whole, at the time. He extended this role by mobilizing other white business persons to support and join the effort of creating a democratic and free South Africa for all. In the democratic era, Cde Gavin continued his activism and was unwavering in his support for the ANC. His charity work in support for youth and communities in distress in the West Rand was admirable and his death has surely robbed those communities Of a philanthropist who gave hope and inspired many young people within those communities through skills training and development. The ANC extends its heartfelt condolences to the family, friends, colleagues and Comrades Of Cde Gavin Watson. May his soul rest in peace. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 26 August 2019