Documentation of foreign nationals is critical 6 August 2019 The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, Adv Bongani Bongo, has called for the full implementation of immigration laws and regulations to ensure that everyone within the borders of South Africa is documented. The information that is gathered through documentation is essential for other government departments and non-governmental organisations to plan their work effectively. The portfolio committee has committed itself to strengthening oversight on various aspects of the department’s work, especially around immigration. The National Development Plan is clear on the advantages of legal and developmental migration, and the intention is to strengthen the department’s work in this area. “The committee is clear that immigration should be legal and it wants the department to strengthen procedures for processing immigrants’ applications. It is untenable that a country can have large numbers of undocumented immigrants and nothing is done about it,” Advocate Bongani Bongo said. Firstly, the committee believes that completing the legislative-making process of the Border Management Authority is necessary to safeguard South Africa’s borders. A seamless process in and out of the country is but one pillar in curbing illegal immigration. Secondly, ensuring staff capacity at the Immigration Services Inspectorate should be a priority, as it is currently understaffed. “But enforcement must be preceded by properly working application systems that are not prone to inordinate delays,” Adv Bongo emphasised. Thirdly, the fight against forgery and corruption must be strengthened, by weeding out corrupt elements within Home Affairs. Accepting bribes to circumvent the system will not be tolerated. During its oversight visit to Gauteng Province from 26-30 August 2019, the committee will engage with the Department of Home Affairs and other stakeholders, in an attempt to resolve some of the challenges around documenting foreign nationals. The committee condemns in the strongest terms the attack on law enforcement officials in the City of Johannesburg. Police have an important role to play in securing the safety of all and must not be subjected to such attacks. The committee also plans to engage with the Portfolio Committee of Small Business Development to ensure that regulations around small business trading are strengthened. Issued by Bongani Bongo, Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, 6 August 2019