The DA condemns the Free State Government supported animal abuse 29 August 2019 The DA strongly condemns the animal abuse taking place at Free State Provincial Government supported agricultural and agri-processing projects. The conviction of a manager at the Thaba Nchu abattoir for animal abuse on Tuesday after charges lodged by the SPCA in 2018 is a victory for animal welfare. During an inspection at the facility in 2018, the SPCA found animals being killed with a blunt knife and a faulty bolt gun. A cow had to be shot five times with this gun before dying and another cow only died after the sixth attempt to kill it with the blunt knife. Pigs were also found in squalid conditions and were injuring each other. The Free State Provincial Government that supports this project must be held accountable for this abuse. Although animals at abattoirs have no rights, this is clearly an animal welfare issue. The DA has raised the issue of animal rights and animal welfare previously in the Free State Legislature and a resolution on animal rights introduced by the Free State was passed by the DA’s federal Council. The DA has been vocal in the Legislature about the welfare of wildlife, especially in the lion industry, as well as domestic farm and other animals. On Monday I carried out an oversight visit to Provincial Government supported the Ditatalawa Agri-Village near Harrismith and was shocked to find a calf tied to a pole without food, water and shelter and other cattle in an over-grazed camp without water or shelter (see photos here and here ). I reported this to the acting HOD, Dr Masiteng who indicated that they would investigate it. During a previous visit to Diyatalawa the Department was issued a warning by the NSPCA after I reported the neglect of horses to them. I will be submitting questions to the MEC for Agriculture in the Free State about the Department’s animal welfare policies at state supported facilities. The DA echoes the SPCA’s requests that the agricultural sector do not support facilities that do not meet animal welfare requirements. Issued by Roy Jankielsohn, DA MPL and Leader of the Official Opposition in the Free State Provincial Legislature, 29 August 2019