Another ANC Chief Whip, another State Capture scandal 13 August 2019 The Democratic Alliance is concerned, but not surprised that another senior ANC member has been linked to one of the key players in the deceptive web of State Capture, Regiments Capital. ANC Chief Whip in the Gauteng Legislature, Sochayile Khanyile, has been fingered, in an Amabhungane article, as a facilitator of alleged corruption during his time as ANC Secretary in Ekurhuleni. The article links Khanyile to a land deal in the municipality and how he and another ANC member would “…give support for the project and offered to unblock the apparent bureaucratic obstacles we are now experiencing”. This is according to Litha Nyhonyha, co-founder of Thebe Investment Corporation – whose founding shareholder is an ANC investment vehicle- Batho Batho Trust, and at the time of the above quote, Executive Chairman of Regiments Capital. The planned deal was for Regiments development arm, Xihangu Realty Developers to build 14 000 houses on government owned land in Ekurhuleni, for which unknown “fixers” of this deal would receive R11 million – R1 million to be paid up-front. Despite the deal not going ahead, there is still the unanswered question as to whether the facilitators of this deal received their R11 million incentive? It is no secret that key ANC members in Gauteng have been linked to Regiments – former Johannesburg Mayor, Parks Tau; disgraced former ANC Legislature Chief Whip, Brian Hlongwa and others. I will be writing to Gauteng Premier, David Makhura to ascertain whether he knew about Khanyile’s involvement in the alleged land deal, and if so, what action he has taken. I will also pose questions to the various Gauteng government departments to ascertain whether they have done business with Regiments Capital or any of its entities. Another ANC Chief Whip, another Regiments scandal. The ANC in Gauteng is not as “clean” as Premier Makhura has alluded to throughout the Zuma years. The DA will continue to ensure that all those who have benefitted unduly from corruption will meet the full might of the law and are held to account for stealing public funds. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Caucus Leader, 13 August 2019