Economic debate welcomed but implementation remains the Achilles heel 29 August 2019 Agri SA welcomes the latest National Treasury document in principle as it addresses several policy challenges and structural issues, giving specific solutions that are otherwise absent in many policy proposals. Agriculture is well-positioned to give effect to the proposal of making the agriculture sector the driving force of job creation. The scope and the level of detail is refreshing, as well as the honest reflection on the current flaws in the economic policy framework. We congratulate the Minister of Finance, Tito Mboweni on this initiative, but of course the success ultimately depends on the degree of implementation. “We all know honest evaluation and practical implementation are critical factors for progress,” says Omri van Zyl, Agri SA Executive Director. “After almost a decade of the National Development Plan we still have to see actual implementation.  Hopefully, this document can resuscitate the process.” Agri SA welcomes the singling out of agriculture as a sector to focus on for economic growth, transformation and job creation. To create an enabling environment for investment for agriculture, we need several policy outcomes. These include innovative financing solutions, affordable agriculture insurance, improved extension services, enhanced trade promotion, market access, access to water for irrigated agriculture and investment to establish innovative market linkages for smallholders. “The themes identified for growth reforms speak to key structural issues,” says Dr Requier Wait, Agri SA Policy Head: Economics and Trade. “The implementation of these reforms can help to reverse the downward trend in South Africa’s growth potential and competitiveness” The agriculture sector has proved itself as a potential economic game-changer with our positive contribution to GDP growth and job creation. Agri SA will submit a detailed commentary to Minister Mboweni. Issued by Omri van Zyl, Agri SA Executive Director, 29 August 2019