Mayor calls on Premier Makhura to remove tainted MEC Maile from ARP investigations 1 August 2019 On Tuesday, 29 July 2019, I wrote a letter to the Gauteng Premier, Hon. David Makhura to request the removal of the MEC for Human Settlements, Urban Planning and COGTA, Lebogang Maile from any oversight role in the ongoing investigations into the Alexander Renewal Project (ARP). Owing to the apathy on this matter by Provincial Government, I have requested that Premier Makhura responds to this letter by Friday, 2 August 2019. Failing which, I will be left with no option but to take this matter forward with the SA Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) and Public Protector. The letter is in view of the MEC’s dubious behaviour and comments on the subject of the ARP investigations, as well as numerous allegations that are currently being investigated by the City relating to MEC Maile’s close relatives allegedly benefitting directly from the tainted ARP. Two weeks ago, MEC Maile bizarrely and publicly denied that any corruption had taken place during the ARP. It is strange that the MEC would make such a pronouncement whilst there are ongoing investigations which are revealing concerning evidence of corruption that undermined efforts to bring development to the residents of Alexandra. Moreover, MEC Maile’s conduct at the South African Human Rights Commission’s (SAHRC) inquiry into Alexandra last week, 23 July 2019, not only seemingly undermined the inquiry but also the Chapter 9 institutions holding the inquiry. The SAHRC convened the inquiry to establish the whereabouts of the missing R1.3-billion meant for the restoration of this iconic township. During said inquiry, MEC Maile acknowledged that his brother, Mike Maile, was one of seven programme managers who handled the ARP. However, he complained that his elder brother was falsely implicated in the alleged misuse of funds meant for the ARP. Once again, it is reckless to make such pronouncements given that investigations which are ongoing. In addition, when Mr Vusumuzi Dlamini, senior legal officer in the Office of the Public Protector, asked MEC Maile what the current status of the ARP was, he replied: “We have moved it to the City of Johannesburg but I can’t say it’s closed. It wasn’t properly run. There was no concerted effort, there has been no coordination.” How then, can he be so bold as to state that there was no corruption and, in the process, exonerates his brother from any wrong-doing, despite his brother being a programme manager of the ARP? I was also deeply disturbed by his comments regarding the Auditor General’s recommendations on the ARP. When asked whether he had taken steps to implement the Auditor General’s recommendations, MEC Maile said he would only institute a probe for good reason, otherwise he would be wasting taxpayers’ money. These comments do not leave much confidence into the investigation being conducted by the Provincial Government into the ARP. It is also important to note that numerous allegations relating to MEC Maile’s relatives benefitting from the ARP are currently under investigation by the City. It is clear that MEC Maile is deeply conflicted on this matter. It is, therefore, not only absurd but also unethical for MEC Maile to play any role whatsoever in the on-going investigations into the ARP. In addition, the City’s Group Forensic and Investigation Services Unit (GFIS) has confirmed that they met with the Province’s Anti-Fraud and Corruption Unit officials on 10 June 2019, to discuss (a) the unauthorised entry of Mr Aubrey Musetha into the City’s locked ARP office and (b) the Province’s request to access the documents seized by GFIS, for the purpose of meeting the request of the SAHRC and the Public Protector for further information. At this meeting GFIS granted access to the documents seized and invited Provincial Government officials to identify and copy the information required. Mr Mpendulo Radebe informed GFIS in writing - and verbally - that Provincial Government officials would access the information on 17 June 2019 and thereafter changed this date to 21 June, 4 July and 5 July. Despite GFIS having invited Provincial Government officials on 10 June 2019 to access the documents seized by GFIS, Provincial officials have failed to arrive despite several undertakings to do so. This leaves me questioning whether Provincial Government is as serious about getting to the bottom of the ARP allegations of mismanagement and misappropriation of funds allocated to the programme as the City of Johannesburg is. Certainly, there appears to be a disregard – not to mention a lack of leadership - on their part to investigate this urgent matter. The challenges faced by residents in Alexandra are substantial and the people of Alexandra deserve answers as to what became of the development which was promised through the Alexandra Renewal Project. For so long as MEC Maile is allowed to comment on or have oversight over any of these investigations, I sadly doubt that these answers will be forthcoming. Issued by Luyanda Mfeka, Director: Mayoral Communications, Office of the Executive Mayor, 1 August 2019