DA denied oversight entry at South Africa’s worst sexual offence police station 22 August 2019 The Democratic Alliance was yesterday denied entry at the Inanda SAPS – the country’s worst police station on record when it comes to reports of sexual offences. The purpose of the oversight inspection was to establish, amongst others, whether the station has sufficient rape kits. This after the DA recently established that: - 76% of police stations in South Africa do not have adult rape kits in stock; and - A further 69% do not have child rape kits available. In March 2019 there were no rape kits for either adults or children at Inanda SAPS – the same status from when the DA conducted an oversight a year ago. The shortage of rape kits has been a gross injustice to rape survivors. In the absence of rape kits, evidence in reported rape cases cannot be collected. Without evidence, the ability to successfully prosecute perpetrators will be reduced. The DA is disgusted by yesterday’s refusal to allow access to this police station. This act, by the Acting Station Commander, Brigadier Kunene, has severely disadvantaged the local community after the DA was denied the opportunity to get an update on whether there are now rape kits available and whether the victim friendly rooms have been revamped. This action must be considered an insult to every individual that has been the victim of a horrific crime of a sexual nature and has not received the necessary help from SAPS. The negative attitude the DA received yesterday is further a slap in the face to the national Women’s Month Campaign, proving that the #hearmetoo campaign means nothing to the officials whose responsibility it is to provide a safe environment for rape and sexually abused victims and to ensure that perpetrators are brought to book. In a bizarre twist, the DA was allowed access to the Umlazi SAPS, the second station scheduled for an inspection yesterday. The station was earmarked after being on record as the third worst countrywide when it comes to sexual offences and after it was established earlier this year that the station only had 46 rape kits for adults and none for children. Yesterday’s visit has revealed that: - Challenges still exist when it comes to statements from children who have been victims of sexual abuse; - An increase in unlicensed liquor outlets and entertainment venues in the area has led to an increase in female rape victims; - There is a lack of ‘warm bodies’ to ensure frequent enforcement and police visibility; and - Cable theft six months ago has left the station’s phones lines down and the community unable to access the help they need. Yesterday’s events show that the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing when it comes to the SAPS. The DA will today write to the MEC of Community Safety and Liaison to insist that he address the challenges we faced at Inanda SAPS yesterday. We will also demand that crimes against women and children in KZN are treated with the priority they deserve. The DA will not be deterred by any attempt to block our constitutional right to hold the ANC-led provincial government to account. Nor will we be deterred in ensuring the people of KZN’s right to a professional police service is provided. Issued by Sharon Hoosen, DA KZN Spokesperson on Community Safety and Liaison, 22 August 2019