Ramaphosa must report back to Parliament within 14 days on Bosasa’s R3 million “donation” to the ANC 22 August 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) welcomes President Cyril Ramaphosa’s undertaking in Parliament today to consider a letter showing the ANC received a R3 million “donation” from Bosasa in March 2014. This follows my disclosure of a letter in the House today from then ANC Treasurer-General, Zweli Mkhize, thanking Bosasa for this “donation” to the ANC. The letter expresses ‘sincere appreciation and gratitude for the R3 million and continued financial support and contributions rendered to the ANC.’ The President requested time to consider and reflect upon the letter and its contents, and to report back to Parliament in due course. In the interests of transparency and accountability, the President must respond to Parliament in writing within 14 days as to: - Whether as ANC Deputy President at the time, he was aware of the donation; and - Whether he will instruct the ANC to pay back every cent of money received from Bosasa over the past 15 years. We cannot ignore the fact that Bosasa is a company that has been bribing ANC politicians for the last two decades. A 2009 SIU report found an improper and corrupt relationship between government officials and Bosasa. It appears that the ANC may be in the possession of the proceeds of unlawful activities which is an offense in terms of section 6 of the Prevention of Organised Crime (POCA) Act 121 of 1998. Bosasa contracts with the ANC government total over R12 billion. This is corruption 101 and follows the standard ANC triangle of corruption: the ANC-in-government gives lucrative tenders to connected cronies who bribe officials, which in return funds the ANC. In addition, President Ramaphosa received a R500 000 “donation” from Bosasa towards his CR17 campaign. Subsequent to that, his son Andile has secured lucrative deals with Bosasa to the value of at least R2 million. The people of South Africa must know that this system of corruption has become part of the very fabric of the ANC – regardless of who leads the organisation. It's time to break this system of corruption once and for all. Issued by Mmusi Maimane, Leader of the Democratic Alliance, 22 August 2019