IFP: Axing of eThekwini Mayor Has Been Long Overdue 13 August 2019 The IFP welcomes the axing of the embattled former eThekwini Mayor, Zandile Gumede and Themba Njilo the mayor of besieged Msunduzi (Pietermaritzburg) municipality, the capital of KZN, and controversial deputy mayor, Thobani Zuma but the IFP believes that it has been long overdue. There is nothing to celebrate because the ANC has failed dismally to take the necessary steps since the corruption was first detected in the eThekwini Metro. It also failed to act against the inept leadership at the Msunduzi Municipality which has been placed under Administrator. The Msunduzi Municipality is in shambles due to the fact that the former KZN MEC of Cogta, Nomusa Dube Ncube was hell bent in protecting incompetent ANC comrades. She waited for the Msunduzi Municipality to fall in its knees before the intervention was made at the eleventh hour before the 2019 General Elections in order to appease the concerned residents and to get votes during the elections. Residents of both the eThekwini Metro and Msunduzi Municipality have been let down the by inept ANC leadership. We have repeatedly asked for action, there has been slowness in action on the ANC side. The ANC has no back bone in taking action against its corrupt and incompetent comrades but it would rather prefer to protect and reward them with other senior positions. The former eThekwini Mayor, Zandile Gumede has depleted the public purse for getting a salary while sitting at home doing nothing. The IFP is concerned that it has become clear that suspension on full pay was a creeping phenomenon in the local government and public service. What is quite clear is that the ANC-run government has failed to implement proper procedures to ensure the completion of disciplinary processes within reasonable timeframes, and therefore tacitly allows officials to be on suspension endlessly, with full pay. The IFP believes that there must be a high standard of professional ethics promoted and maintained from the top political leadership, which cascades to all levels of authority. The electorate has the responsibility to hold political leadership to account for actions against corruption, same way political leadership is held accountable for other service delivery. Public institutions have the responsibilities towards the public in terms of their mandate and should carry out their mandate without fear or favour. The IFP is waiting for action to be taken against 62 councillors who are also alleged to have engaged in corrupt activities in the eThekwini Metro. No should be exempted for the havoc they caused in the eThekwini Metro. The IFP expect nothing from the ANC except that it appoints competent people with impeccable track record of being corrupt free and empathy for working for the people. Residents of eThekwini and Msunduzi want service delivery not compromised individuals. Issued by Velenkosini Hlabisa, Leader of the Official Opposition in KwaZulu-Natal, 13 August 2019