ANC condemns sexist remarks directed at its Deputy Secretary-General 31 July 2019 The African National Congress (ANC) is disappointed by the leader of the United Democratic Movement, Bantu Holomisa, for referring to the Deputy Secretary-General of the ANC, Comrade Jessie Duarte, as "tea girl". This blatant contempt for and belittling of women has no place in a non-sexist and democratic society which frowns upon misogyny and all its manifestations. We must isolate and reject all those who derive pleasure from abusing and undermining women. As we are about to mark the beginning of Women's Month tomorrow, we call on all progressive men in the UDM to distance themselves from Mr Holomisa's misogynistic tendencies. He must be condemned by all South Africans who are committed to uprooting the demon of sexism and the oppression of women from our society. Comrade Jessie is a solid cadre of our movement who has earned her stripes in the trenches. Her decades of sacrifice and contribution to the struggle for liberation and the reconstruction and development of our country cannot be reduced nor erased by a sexist label. This is a huge insult to Cde Jessie, the women of the Congress movement and South African women in general. Throughout its history, women have been playing a central role in the life of the African National Congress. From Charlotte Maxeke, Lillian Ngoyi, Ruth Mompati, Winnie Mandela to the current generation, women activists have led heroic struggle against racial, class and gender oppression. The ANC salutes Cde Jessie Duarte and her generation for taking the revolutionary baton that was left behind by those who came before them. No one can contest our assertion that in the 25 years of freedom and democracy, the ANC-led government has registered significant progress in restoring the dignity of women. However, persistent misogynistic tendencies threaten to reverse all these gains and to derail our national efforts to promote women empowerment and gender equality. The struggle against patriarchy and misogyny continues! Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 31 July 2019