Nersa follows AfriForum’s advice 11 August 2019 The National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa) on 8 August 2019 announced the increased electricity tariff that the Tshwane Metro is allowed to implement. The increased tariff includes an increase of 13,07% on the 2018/2019 tariff for the 2019/2020 term. According to Jaco Grobbelaar, AfriForum’s District Coordinator for Greater Pretoria, the civil rights organisation welcomes this announcement. “We are satisfied with the tariff approved by Nersa and accept that the increase is much more realistic than the previous proposed increase that was temporarily implemented by the Metro. The fact that the correct processes were followed this time before the announcement is also a positive sign.” The announcement took place after an intense dispute recently developed regarding the implementation of an increased electricity tariff that wasn’t approved by Nersa. Nersa subsequently decided to launch a public participation process to consequently also get the community’s input. Grobbelaar adds that AfriForum placed the result on the table from the get-go and that the organisation is glad that the community’s input was taken into account. “AfriForum proposed from the beginning that only a 13,07% increase must be implemented on the 2018/2019 tariff, after which a structural change be approved for the 2020/2021 financial year. AfriForum will also participate in that process and ensure that the voice of Pretoria residents is heard.” Nersa’s decision now means that no basic fee for the current financial year will be placed on electricity consumers. Residents that have prepaid metres will be compensated with extra units by the Metro for the increased tariff that they had to pay for units up until now. Residents with prepaid metres that paid the increased tariff can also follow this link to declare a dispute with the Metro so that they can be compensated for the costs incurred: http://bit.ly/2GG25NA. Issued by Carina Bester, Media Relations Officer, AfriForum, 11 August 2019