R131 million Wilro Park Substation upgrade complete 8 August 2019 Today, 8 August 2019, I officially opened the Wilro Park Substation after it underwent a R131 million refurbishment. This was one of 11 major substation upgrades City Power is currently working on. Furthermore, the completion of the Wilro Park Substation upgrade is the first of six planned for the current financial year. I was joined by the MMC for Environment and Infrastructure Services, Cllr Nico de Jager, and City Power management as we marked the official launch of the substation after substantial upgrades were made. Before upgrades started, the substation had already been in existence for well over 40 years, and the equipment surpassed its average lifespan. In an effort to combat power outages faced by residents in Wilro Park and surrounds, three 45MVA (megavolt amps) transformers were installed. This is an improvement from the two 40MVA transformers that existed before. These upgrades are key to grid stability in Johannesburg where each individual upgrade contributes to a more reliable overall power supply. Wilro Park Substation supplies approximately 5000 domestic and business customers in the Roodepoort area and the areas of Wilro Park, Princess Crossing, Princess, Roodekrans, Helderkruin, and Breaunanda will benefit directly from this upgrade. Wilro Park Substation’s safety operating standards have now been enhanced, mitigating the risk of injuries. The upgrade further allows for any future service connections that can be made from the substation without compromising the stability of the grid. The substation has also been capacitated with 88kv indoor gas insulated switchgear (GIS). The GIS system is very important in ensuring that the technicians can operate on the circuit breakers remotely. Operating on the circuit breakers allow technicians to work without coming into close contact with the high voltage machinery and equipment. Further adding to the growth of the local economy, four local beneficiaries were afforded the opportunity of employment during the project. It is critical that we continue to increase capacity at substations like Wilro Park to ensure that we can meet the rising consumption demand that comes with population growth, especially in Johannesburg. Despite the R170 billion infrastructure backlog inherited by the previous ANC administration, along with continuous cable theft and vandalism, we will continue to work hard to bringDiphetogo to the residents of Johannesburg by fast tracking projects like these. And it is this progress and change brought about by our multiparty government which has shamed the ANC following their years of neglect, failure and corruption. This is why they are tabling a motion of no confidence against the multi-party government. Ultimately, a stable power supply means a greater chance of business growth in our communities, leading to the creation of much needed jobs and growth of the local economy. I would like to thank the members of this coalition government; the IFP, ACDP, COPE, UDM and Freedom Front Plus for their continued support. I am also thankful for the contributions of the EFF which, although not a member of the coalition, votes on an issue by issue basis. Issued by Isaac Mangena, City Power Spokesperson, 8 August 2019