On the Radar: - Collective ID names new MD- Havas SA appoints chief strategy officer- New Jacaranda FM marketing manager- firstEquity appoints digital agency- e.tv news in brand refresh- People mag revamps, reduces frequency- #Events: Nedbank IMC 2020 ticket sales open Features: BREAKING: Another Top 5 bank out to pitch by Herman Manson. This is the third major bank to go out to pitch over the course of the last year. McDonald’s South Africa appoints new lead agencyby Herman Manson. The fast-food retailer has appointed Pacinamix as its new above-the-line lead agency. Press Pass: Money is news media's biggest challenge — Khadija Patelby Carey Finn. The editor-in-chief of the Mail & Guardian believes that it is up to journalists to secure the future of democracy. By Invitation Only: Is “goodvertising” here for good?by Jeff Harvey. “Woke” ads are all the rage at creative award shows but, in an industry that celebrates originality, has this trend run its course? Only Connect Podcast: Is the CMO extinct? Rob Paddock • Ep 4by Bradley Elliott. We talk to the Valenture Institute CEO about how some big guns have decided to rid themselves of their CMOs. What does this mean for CMOs in SA? Is the role really extinct, or is it evolving? Regular Reads: #Campaigns: Uncovering money secrets with Nedbankby MarkLives. We feature insight into the ongoing #NedbankMoneySecrets campaign by Joe Public, Riverbed, The Mediashop, The Odd Number, Liquorice and Greg Gray of Romance Films. Q5: Young, female and an ECD — Camilla Clerke [interview]by Carey Finn. The executive creative director of recently formed HelloFCB+ sat down to talk shop. - SA TV Ratings: SA TV Ratings: e.tv — primetime top 20 for Jun 2019 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headline! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.