Dr C P Mulder (FF Plus) to ask the President of the Republic: With reference to section 83(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, which requires that he promotes the unity of the nation and that which will advance the Republic, how does he envisage (a) fulfilling this constitutional obligation as Head of State and (b) stopping the current alienation of minorities in the Republic? NO1416E REPLY: Honourable Members, While the Constitution enjoins the President to promote the unity of the nation, it is the role and the responsibility of all South Africans to build a country that belongs to all who live in it. In undertaking my responsibility as President of the Republic, I am guided in the main by the Preamble to our Constitution. Among other things, it calls on all of us to heal the divisions of the past, establish a society based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights, ensure every citizen is equally protected by the law and free the potential of each person. The achievement of national unity depends on the advancement of equality in all spheres of public and private life. All South Africans must have the same rights and opportunities regardless of race, gender, sex, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth. Since 1994, we have put in place policies and programmes to safeguard these rights and advance these opportunities. We have sought to advance the constitutional principle that everyone has the right to use the language and to participate in the cultural life of their choice. Given the huge inequality in our society, which is mainly defined along lines of race and gender, the promotion of national unity requires that we take measures to advance those South Africans who have been disadvantaged by unfair discrimination. That is why we have directed public resources towards the poor, why we have implemented employment equity and broad-based black economic empowerment, why we have massively expanded access to education, and why we have introduced a National Minimum Wage. The divisions in our society are not only material. They are also social, cultural and psychological. We must therefore deepen dialogue to ensure that South Africans across the racial and other contours of difference establish common ground and that there is solidarity and mutual trust. These dialogues must address what it means to be an active and responsible citizen. If it is true that there are ‘minorities’ that are alienated, then we need to find out why, (although) I would hesitate to use the word “minorities”; there are groups of people who feel they are alienated. We need to establish whether it is a matter of perception or the consequence of actual experience, and we need to engage in dialogue to address any grievances or concerns. My experience is that the overwhelming majority of South Africans, regardless of race, class or gender, support the measures we have undertaken – in line with the Constitution – to address the inequalities of our past and to affirm those who were previously disadvantaged. They are in many instances also eager and actively seeking to be part of the solution in building a united nation. They have built a bridge and crossed over it. They understand that we will never achieve a united, peaceful society for as long as racial privilege or other forms of inequality continue. Perhaps it is time for us to challenge this idea of so-called ‘minorities’. It is indeed true that South Africa is made up of people of different races, ethnicities, language groups and religions, but we are all part of the greater South African people. Whatever our individual backgrounds or circumstances, we are all part of the majority. South Africa belongs to all of us equally and we must all feel that we belong to this South Africa, regardless of the various differences that we may have along the lines of language, region or colour. We are all one nation and let us begin to act as one nation. I thank you. Issued by The Presidency, 23 August 2019