City of Tshwane mayor 'out of line' by placing city manager on 'special leave' - ANC 1 August 2019 The ANC in Tshwane says mayor Stevens Mokgalapa's decision to extend city manager Dr Moeketsi Mosola's leave is out of line. According to the party, Mosola was no longer an employee of the City as per a council meeting resolution taken on July 25. On Wednesday, Mokgalapa announced the embattled city manager would not be vacating his office because he was yet to sign a settlement agreement with the City. Because of this, it had granted Mosola special leave. "This means the city manager will remain in his position until August 30, 2019, subject to finalising the separation agreement," a statement by the City read. The ANC said it was part of the closed council meeting, where a resolution was taken to enter into a separation agreement with Mosola. "The council, in its resolution, did not include a golden handshake, but it is paying Dr Moeketsi Mosola a portion of his remaining contract from when he started in 2017. His annual salary is R2.46m," ANC Tshwane regional secretary Eugene Modise said in a statement on Thursday. Modise said Section 54a of the Municipal Systems Act made it clear that only the council could appoint a city manager or an acting one. "Councillor Stevens Mokgalapa is way out of line to even contemplate extending Dr Moeketsi Mosola's leave as he is no longer an employee of the City of Tshwane as per a council meeting resolution." The party said Mokgalapa had misled the council. "Dr Moeketsi Mosola has been on lengthy sick leave as evidenced by the sick note he submitted to the City. There is no record of a 'special leave' registered with the City submitted by Dr Moeketsi Mosola. "It is clear that councillor Stevens Mokgalapa is misleading the council with the report he submitted on the termination of the city manager and separation agreement when he himself unilaterally rescinded a resolution of the council under the pretext of unfinished business in the separation agreement." The ANC added it was now calling on the local government MEC in Gauteng to immediately intervene and resolve the impasse, which it said had been caused by Mokgalapa. The party announced it was also taking legal advice, and would not hesitate to approach the courts to reverse Mokgalapa's decision. News24