On the Radar: - Pernod Ricard SA to centralise ops in Jozi- New biz wins for Flume, DUO- DStv appoints lead sponsorship, activations agency- New media ops lead at The MediaShop Features: EXCLUSIVE: Wunderman Thompson SA on BMW Group winby Herman Manson. BMW Group South Africa has moved both its BMW and MINI brands to Wunderman Thompson South Africa. Magazine circ continues dramatic decline, falling 18.7% YOYWeekend newspapers leads circ losses — ABC Q2 2019by Herman Manson. The ABC of SA has released consumer-magazine and newspaper circulation statistics for April–June 2019 (ABC Q2 2019). #AgencyFocus: Anthropology works at atypical Demographicaby Carey Finn. Anthropology is the B2B marketing agency’s latest approach to solving advertising problems. Young, Gifted & Killing It: Farah Fortuneby Veli Ngubane. Farah Fortune on travelling the world as a mom, Khuli Chana, 4IR and a warning about expensive makeup. The Martini Shot: #MeToo in SA film productionby Bobby Amm. In the SA film production sector, some local advocacy groups claim sexual harassment is rife and under-reported. Frank: Kindness & the clientagency relationship by Mimi Nicklin. Why is it that, even in today’s transparent society, people think it’s ok to be unkind, simply because the phone call is between two people “at work”? Regular Reads: Q5: How to create better content, with Matt Potter [interview]by Carey Finn. The John Brown Media UK chief content officer has strong feelings about content. Get it right, and you’ve got a lifelong brand relationship, he reckons. - SA TV Ratings: SABC 2 — primetime top 20 for Jun 2019 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify.biz headlines! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.