Justice and Correctional Services Committee to continue with parliamentary process into Adv Jiba and Mr Mrwebi 19 August 2019 The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services will continue tomorrow with its planned meeting to consider the restoration of Adv Nomgcobo Jiba and Mr Lawrence Mrwebi to office. Committee Chairperson Mr Bulelani Magwanishe said: “We have noted media reports about certain parties wanting to stop the parliamentary process until the review application by Adv Jiba, deputy director of the National Prosecuting Authority, has been concluded by the High Court. At this stage, the committee will continue with its programme, as we have not been formally informed or interdicted to stop our proceeding.” Adv Jiba has asked the court to set aside the Mokgoro report, after President Cyril Ramaphosa used it in April to relieve her and Mr Mrwebi of their duties in the National Prosecuting Authority. In terms of legislation, President Ramaphosa has to refer his decision to Parliament for approval Mr Magwanishe said the law states that once the president has sent his report to Parliament, Parliament has 30 days to respond. “We do not want to be in violation of the law. In terms of the draft programme, we must finish the process by August 27 and report to the National Assembly by September 3.” He said during a previous joint meeting with the Select Committee on Security and Justice, the committees had given Adv Mrwebi and Mr Jiba 10 working days to make submissions as to why they should not be removed from their positions. The committees had refused a proposal that the two must make oral submissions, saying the written submissions would be sufficient. Members of the committees had insisted that they were not re-opening the inquiry. What they were seeking to do was to ensure they looked at all the documents that were available to them. They said the inquiry had heard evidence from all sides and therefore there was no need for Parliament to start that process all over again. Issued by Rajaa Azzakani on behalf of Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services, 19 August 2019