ANC condemns acts of criminality in the Johannesburg CBD 2 August 2019 The African National Congress (ANC) is disturbed by acts Of criminality which took place in the Johannesburg Central Business District (CBD) yesterday. We condemn in the strongest possible terms the attacks on our law enforcement officers. We call on the full might of the state to come down hard on these criminals who disrespect the laws Of our land. The attack on our law-enforcement officers is an attack on our State and sovereignty, and must never go unpunished. Not only does this undermine the rule of law, but it also poses a serious threat to the security of our state. The ANC-led government has domesticated the SADC protocol on the movement of people and goods. Our policy on welcoming foreign nationals who face persecutions in their own countries support the integration Of vulnerable people into our communities. What we will not, and do not, accept is the blatant disrespect for the laws our country by any person. The actions of stone-throwing and attacks aimed at members of the South African Police Service by informal traders in the CBD is an assault on the citizens of South Africa living in the city. Foreigners are welcome, but no one is allowed to destroy the little we have. Everyone must Obey the law - citizens, permanent residents and people With temporary Visa status. Undocumented visitors must respect our sovereignty and respect our laws. No one is above the law and no one must abuse our hospitality. The law-enforcement agencies must act swiftly and uncompromisingly to enforce the laws Of our land, including municipal by-laws. Those Who trade in counterfeit goods, Obstruct justice and hijack buildings must face the wrath of our criminal justice system. Law-enforcement agencies must show no mercy to these criminals. Once again, we call on the state to respond firmly to yesterdaVs events in defence of our sovereignty and the rule Of law. Our police Officers must never be obstructed from fulfilling their duties of enforcing law and order courageously and without fear. Those identified as perpetrators of these acts must face the wrath and full might of the law. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 2 August 2019