NSFAS missing millions: Parliament must discuss consequences of cash textbook allowances 27 August 2019 Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Higher Education will meet on Wednesday to receive a progress report from the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) on student allowances and the state of readiness for the coming academic year. We believe that any discussion of the state of readiness for 2020 will not be complete without addressing the academic consequences of the cash disbursement of textbook allowances this year. In 2019, NSFAS changed the manner in which it disburses the student book allowance of up to R5 000 – from a ring-fenced system that allowed funds only to be spent on learning materials including textbooks, to a direct cash transfer. We believe that the decision to disburse R5 000 in cash to NSFAS  students has already caused unintended consequences and will have a profoundly negative impact on students’ success rates at tertiary institutions. Since the change of policy at the start of the 2019 year, academic book sales have dropped dramatically – most notably, but certainly not exclusively, where a high proportion of students previously used their ring-fenced NSFAS book allowance. For example, at universities with a 90% + dependence on NSFAS funding, book unit sales dropped by an alarming 60% to 91%. This means that the R5 000 of the NSFAS allowance that was previously ring-fenced for spending on books is now being spent on other items. We estimate that up to half a billion rand in NSFAS book allowances is not being spent on academic materials and textbooks. We are aware that there are many spending pressures facing NSFAS students. These include pressure to remit money home to support family members in need, and to fund the consumption of other goods not related to a students’ education. We cannot ignore the impact that not having the required books and learning materials has on a student’s academic success. Textbooks are essential to students’ success at tertiary institutions – the very reason for a textbook allowance being allocated in the first place. It is too early to conclude, but with fewer students purchasing textbooks, there is a strong possibility that student performance in South Africa is declining. Anecdotal reports indicate that this is the case in at least some courses. Indeed, evidence from Botswana (where a similar policy of paying book allowances directly into student bank accounts was introduced in 2017) is instructive. The following is an extract from a report entitled ‘The impact of changes in policy to provide prescribed textbooks to Government Sponsored students’: Since the announcement was made, sales of prescribed textbooks have declined by almost 90%. There is clear and compelling evidence that students use the cash book allowance for other purposes than what it is meant for. Further analysis of the impact of this show the beginnings of what can be described as an “Academic Tsunami”.  There is evidence of an overall and across the board drop in standards at all the main Tertiary Institutions.  Failure rates for 1st years and dropout rates in Semester 1 at the main institutions have increased by around 24%.  The teaching and learning environment have been negatively impacted and students are no longer fully prepared for their studies. Degree outcomes have been adversely impacted. There is therefore considerable concern that our NSFAS-funded students are being similarly disadvantaged, especially where pass rates and future achievement are concerned. We hope that the members of the Portfolio Committee will urgently discuss this issue at its meeting on Wednesday. We have also written to the Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Mohlopi Mapulane MP, and offered to brief the committee on the alarming data as soon as possible. Another year of the misspending of scarce public funds would be devastating to student academic outcomes – the impending ‘academic tsunami’ looming for South African tertiary students must be avoided. Issued by Mohamed Kharwa, Convener of the Alliance for Academic Success, 27 August 2019