Corruption in Gauteng SAPS on the rise; and the highest 28 August 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) is shocked to learn that there has been a marked increase in corruption within the South African Police Service (SAPS). It is disappointing that the leadership in SAPS is not doing enough to curb corruption within their organisation. This information was revealed in the 2019 Analysis of Corruption Trends Report released by Corruption Watch. Furthermore, the report indicates that for the first time corruption in the police sector has overtaken other sectors like schools, health and local government. According to the report, abuse of power is at 35.7% and bribery is at 30.6% in the police sector. In an earlier report released by Corruption Watch in June, Corruption in Uniform: When Cops Become Criminals focusing only on corruption in the police sector, it was revealed that Gauteng had 52.8% corruption, the highest in the country. The DA has always said that corruption within SAPS must be rooted out as a matter of urgency, in order to create an honest and a professional police service. Trust between residents and the police have broken down because of corruption. Gauteng residents must feel safe in their homes, places of work and on the street. The only way this can be achieved is if there is a good working relationship between residents. Corruption would be easy to get rid of in SAPS if only the good cops are willing to arrest the minority bad element in their midst, however, this begins with good leadership and political will. The DA will continue to call on government to ensure that SAPS is professionalised, corruption is eradicated and that the police competency be given to the province in order to better address local needs. In addition, the MEC for Community Safety, Faith Mazibuko, as per the DA’s numerous submissions, must look at appointing a Provincial Police Ombudsman, as is the case in the DA-governed Western Cape, to resolve complaints and ensure effective community oversight over policing Issued by John Moodey, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Community Safety, 28 August 2019