NW Department of Health’s serious shortage of resources endangers countless lives 29 August 2019 The Democratic Alliance in North West will submit written questions to the MEC for Department of Health, Madoda Sambatha regarding the shortage of ambulances and lack of Advanced Life Support (ALS) Paramedics that contributes to the low response rate by ambulances. During the Health and Social Development Portfolio Committee meeting held on Tuesday, 27 August 2019, it was revealed that the province only has 43 ambulances available to service rural areas. Staff shortages, lack of communication systems and an inadequate fleet all contribute to the EMRS responding to only 44% of P1 emergency calls in less than 15 minutes in urban areas. It is an utter disgrace that the EMRS are unable to reach 45% of their rural patients within 40 minutes. Citizens in rural areas do not take longer to die. The Department is unable to provide details of how this statistic is measured as none of the North West EMRS vehicles have any reliable computerized dispatch systems, nor do they have tracking systems. The shortage of vehicles is compounded by the fact that the Department does not employ a single ALS Paramedic. The Department explained that the long registration process complicates the replacement of vehicles. Subsequently, the North West Provincial Emergency Medical Rescue Services (EMRS) has a dire shortage of ambulances, as the current fleet is unable to deal with the demand. Against this backdrop, it is clear that patients are left to suffer the consequences of a Department that has been mismanaged, is currently under administration and is tainted by recent tender scandals involving private ambulance services and Mediosa. During the plenary sitting today, the MEC responded to our concerns by reiterating his commitment to deal with the issues raised. The MEC has entered into discussions with ALS paramedics currently in their final year of study and we are looking forward to seeing at least three paramedics from each district trained as per the MEC’s undertaking. The DA will exercise its oversight role by keeping the MEC to his promises. We will leave no stone unturned in ensuring that every person in this province receive the healthcare services they are entitled to. Issued by Gavin Edwards, DA North West Spokesperson on Health and Social Development, 29 August 2019