NEHAWU CONDEMNS THE MAIL AND GUARDIAN FOR MISLEADING REPORTING ON THE SARS STRIKE Saturday March 30, 2019 The National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union [NEHAWU] condemns with the contempt it deserve the misleading reporting by the Mail and Guardian on the ongoing national strike at the South African Revenue Services [SARS]. The article which appeared yesterday on the website of the Mail and Guardian titled“SARS crippled by Moyane loyalists”suggest that the strike is part of a ploy by unions to fight the battles of the former SARS commissioner Tom Moyane. The article insinuates that Moyane’s allies who still in SARS are using the strike to cripple the institution. NEHAWU is gobsmacked that such a huge publication can throw around such unfounded and ridiculous accusation especially without affording the national union an opportunity to have a say on the matter before putting the article online. As NEHAWU, we strongly believe that we could have clarified the journalist on the reasons why we elected to go on strike than to speculate that we are on a silly conquest to defend individuals. NEHAWU understands the mandate of SARS and the role workers must play in ensuring that it is executed with aplomb and earlier this week we highlighted how the management has been on the forefront of making it impossible for our members and workers to contribute to fulfilling that mandate by creating horrible working conditions and withdrawing our members benefits. Some of the problems that currently engulf the institution emanate from the time of Tom Moyane. It was during his tenure as SARS commissioner that staff morale went down to an all-time low hence we find it preposterous that we would fight on his behalf. To suggest that NEHAWU can be reduced to a personal army is an insult to us and we take serious exceptions to that. We have grown from strength to strength in the last 31 years because of our transformational agenda and exceptional service to members. NEHAWU will always be in the forefront of fighting for better salaries, working conditions for its members and workers through going on strike if there is a deadlock. The country’s Constitution allows workers to go on strike as and when a need arises. A strike is usually the last resort after exhausting all avenues available to resolve a dispute. Balance and fair reporting is a necessity and necessary for the public to be informed properly of current events. We appeal to the Mail and Guardian to desist from one sided and sensational reporting. Failure to do so will leave us with no option but to report the Mail and Guardian to the Press Ombudsman. In this regard, the union will formally write to the Mail and Guardian to demand a formal apology on deliberate distorting on the intention of the strike underway at SARS led by the national union. *** NEHAWU POSITION ON THE CURRENT SARS STRIKE ACTION Saturday March 30, 2019 The National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union [NEHAWU] on the 30th March 2019 convened its South African Revenue Service [SARS] national bargaining forum to assess the impact of the strike and to receive a briefing on the current state of the negotiations with the employer. The bargaining forum was attended by Full Time Shop Stewards, Provincial Coordinators, Provincial Organisers and Provincial Secretaries of NEHAWU. The meeting received reports from provinces on the strike action and update on the dispute itself. After deliberations and robust discussions the meeting resolved that the national union is continuing with the strike action and that on Monday 01stApril 2019 we will report to our members the outcomes of the meeting at the picket lines and receive a mandate from our members in relation to the ongoing negotiations. The union will from here on intensify the strike to ensure our members and workers’ demands are met by the employer. Our open door policy still stands and we are calling on the employer to revert back to the negotiating table as a matter of urgency and respond positively to our demands. It is in the best interest of the employer to ensure the speedily resolution of the current impasse. Workers have been patient for far too long and the patience has ran thin. SARS has a constitutional obligation to respect the rights of workers that are enshrined in the Labour Relations Act, and all other related pieces of legislation. In this regard, we call on the employer to move with speed in tabling an improved offer so that everything can return to normality. Statements issued by NEHAWU Secretariat, 31 March 2019