ANC STATEMENT ON THE RELEASE OF ITS CANDIDATES LIST FOR THE 2019 NATIONAL AND PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS 15 MARCH 2019 A CADRE OF CANDIDATES THAT REPRESENTS ALL SOUTH AFRICANS The Secretary General of the African National Congress, cde Ace Magashule submitted the ANC lists of candidates for national and provincial elections to be held on 8 May 2019, to the Independent Electoral Commission on 13 March 2019. The lists consist of national to national candidates, and province to national candidates for the seats available in the National Assembly. For the nine provincial legislatures, candidates are nominated based on the seats available per province (province to province) The cadre of ANC leaders have accepted nominations and declared themselves ready to serve, and work tirelessly in the remaining 52 days to ensure a decisive victory for the African National Congress. Candidates for national and provincial government, led by President Cyril Ramaphosa, are eager to serve the people and the country as public representatives. They are eager to implement the ANC's Elections Manifesto, to grow South Africa and as we enter the next phase of transformation, to decisively tackle poverty, unemployment and inequality. DEMOCRATIC, RIGOROUS AND FAIR PROCESSES The ANC went through a democratic, rigorous, thorough and fair process, involving its branches, provinces, and Alliance partners, unparalleled by any other political party in this country. This process was guided by the ANC List Guidelines. The ANC List guidelines provided for a democratic process, where all members could nominate through branches, any member could make themselves available and provincial list conferences where representatives from branches voted on the nominated candidates. The provincial list conferences were overseen by the National List Committee, with support of independent electoral institutions. The democratic process is then complemented by an ordering process by the Provincial and National List Committees, to ensure that the criteria as set out in the National List Guidelines are met. These criteria include 50-50 gender equity; at least 20% youth representation; non-racialism; people with disabilities; as well as inclusion of our Alliance partners and fraternal organisations. This is in addition to a fair geographic spread, nationally, as well as within provinces. The ANC also established List appeals committees, where members and structures had the right to lodge their complaints about the process, and were heard. If they were dissatisfied with the process, the National List Appeals Committee reviewed their cases and made a determination, for the National List committee to implement. The process culminated in the extended NEC held at the beginning of January 2019. The extended NEC, functioning as the national list conference received reports and considered all lists. This gathering had to satisfied itself that the guidelines and criteria for all ANC lists were adhered to, and instructed the National and Provincial List Committees, where there were omissions or weaknesses to correct these as per the List Guidelines. A special NEC was held in February 2019 to consider this further work, adopted the lists and delegated the National List Committee and Officials and NWC to finalise the lists for submission. During this process, all nominated candidates (in excess of 800) were required to sign acceptance forms, and there were some who declined. A PEOPLE'S LIST OF CANDIDATES, UNITED IN DIVERSITY Following this extensive process, the ANC's national and provincial lists truely represent the diversity of the soon-to-be 25 year-old young nation, in terms of race, gender, geographic spread, age, identity and class. Our lists also take into consideration track record of the candidates, including their commitment to the cause of social transformation as enshrined in the country's constitution, the Freedom Charter and relevant policy positions of the movement. South Africa has been above the global average percentage of women in parliament since the dawn of democracy in 1994, mainly because of the African National Congress which consistently had at least 50% of women on its lists of candidates. For the 2019 lists, we have done even better, with 53% of our list women. Out of a total list for national to national of three hundred candidates, we have 160 women (53%) and 140 men (47%). The ANC lists also consist of a cadre of young capable leaders, who will play a critical role in the renewal and innovation of our legislatures and government. The youngest candidate on our lists is 20 years old. The ANC also ensured inclusion in its lists, people living with disabilities. Our lists have a careful balance of different generations, capabilities and skills, that allow for innovation, renewal as well as continuity as we approach the coming five years of accelerated transformation. Our lists indeed represents our nation in its diversity and the agenda to grow South Africa. ETHICAL LEADERSHIP The ANC took note of the concems in society, which echoes the sentiments of its 54th National Conference, around public ethics and the need for renewal. It has therefore also submitted all 800 members who were nominated to an intemal vetting process, above and beyond the constitutional and legal requirements of the country. The National List Committee, as per its mandate, removed all candidates who had criminal records for which a sentence of 12 months without the option of a fine was conferred. Beyond and above this, in order to ensure ethical leadership as a cornerstone of renewal, Officials had difficult conversations with a number of candidates, who have heeded advice, followed the dictates of their conscience and voluntarily stepped aside in the best interests of the organisation. There are concerns raised in the media about some of the candidates on our lists. Like all political parties, our members are subjected to the law of the land, and enjoy rights and duties as stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic. The mere public mention of wrong-doing and corruption by an individual, does not make that person guilty, unless due process is followed. The same considerations apply internally. All candidates were subjected to a democratic process by branches. Any arbitrary removal of a candidate without due process, can be challenged in a court of law. Furthermore, in addition to the vetting process, the ANC also has its Integrity structures, who have the powers to act to protect the values and integrity of the movement. Being on the lists does not entitle any candidate to an executive position. All ministers' terms office will come to an end this term. It is the prerogative of the President to appoint ministers for the 6th administration. We are confident that these lists fairly demonstrate the strength and character Of leadership that will grow and take South Africa forward. The complete list of ANC Candidates for national and provincial elections can be seen on our website www.ancl 912.org.za Issued by the African National Congress, 16 March 2019