ANC WELCOMES PROCLAMATION ESTABLISHING INVESTIGATING DIRECTORATE 20 March 2019 The African National Congress (ANC) welcomes the proclamation issued by President Ramaphosa, establishing the Investigating Directorate within the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA). This is a commitment the President made during the State of the Nation Address in February 2019. The ANC believes the establishment of this directorate is a step in the right direction and a demonstration of the ANC-Ied government's unwavering commitment to root out corruption and deal state capture a fatal blow. We have made a firm commitment to demonstrate our seriousness in uprooting all forms of corruption through tangible action. This proclamation puts in motion an irreversible course in cleansing our nation of the evils of lawlessness, organised crime and actions that seek to capture organs of state. The ANC called for the establishment of the Zondo Commission in order to lay bare all forms of state capture and ensure that all those against whom evidence of criminality is found face the full might of the law. This proclamation is the clearest indication that our resolve to realise this goal has never been greater. The long arm of the law will reach all those who presided over the looting of the state with impunity. This proclamation adds to the arsenal of legal instruments aimed at ensuring public resources are employed for the purpose for which they were allocated for and eradicate perverse incentives for corruption. These include the Public Audit Amendment Act and the Financial Intelligence Amendment Act which were signed into law by President Ramaphosa earlier this year. We have learnt significant lessons from both the good and bad of the past twenty-five years. Informed by our history of commitment to the people's cause, we are resolved to make this an era of renewal and hope. We invite all South Africans to become part of a nation on the cusp of hope and renewal and join us in growing South Africa. Statement issued by Dakota Legoete, Acting National Spokesperson, African National Congress, 21 March 2019