Only DA has a plan for Free State’s Eskom crisis 4 March 2019 The announcement by the national Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Zweli Mkhize, to deploy more staff to Mangaung, Maluti-a-Phofung, Mafube, Masilonyana and Letsemeng without dealing with a one of the central problems – politically connected officials -- is like applying a band aid to a shattered leg. While the intervention is at least an acknowledgement of the crisis, it will not deal with the root cause of the problem which is corruption and maladministration. Free State municipalities require major surgery and various amputations before the financial, administrative and service delivery wounds can be adequately bandaged. In 2018 the Free State province was identified as the biggest defaulter in paying energy bills to the troubled power utility Eskom. To date, Eskom debt within the Free State province is in excess of a staggering R5bn. Without any meaningful action steps in place to curb this trend, it appears that the obligatory ransom required by Eskom will continue to escalate. Last year, amongst other exorbitant debts, the three biggest defaulters included Ngwathe Municipality at R940m, Matjhabeng Municipality at R1,8bn, and Maluti-A-Phofung Municipality at a whopping R2,8bn. Collectively, these three municipalities accounted for the vast share of the province’s outstanding liability owed to Eskom. In bringing real Change that Builds One South Africa for All, the DA has introduced the “cheaper electricity bill”. Eskom will be broken into two separate entities, namely into a generation and transmission entity. Our offer would see the generation entity privatized in an effort to break Eskom’s monopoly, allowing independent power producers to compete on an equal footing in the generation sector. Well-functioning metros will be able to source energy directly from independent energy suppliers. With the splitting off of the generation component of Eskom, they could look at selling off power stations to different IPPs in order to settle their debts. Whilst Eskom’s liquidity challenges have been well documented, one does not truly comprehend the magnitude of the situation, until realising that the sovereign debt accounts for approximately 15% of our state liability. Furthermore, Eskom has struggled to maintain operational sustainability, which has seen ongoing coal shortages due to the inherent lack of management – which has further seen foreign investment in our mines dry up. Notwithstanding the above, systematic corruption in the Free State, through the employment of additional staff, malfeasance, fraud and the state capture project perfected under the failing ANC-run government, has compromised the credibility of the provincial and local governments, and continues to erode investor confidence. The infamous cadre deployed strategy has crippled our provincial government’s ability to refinance debts, as failing ANC political deployess lack critical skills necessary to add value to the Free State - whilst politicians continue to benefit from this. This raises the question - what has the provincial department done to assist municipalities to manage and curb their debt to Eskom and other institutions? The DA will, through the MEC for Co-operative Governance, pose questions in the Legislature, in an attempt to ascertain whether the provincial government has any meaningful turnaround strategies in place, to eradicate the provincial debts owed to Eskom. The last such strategy was the failed Operation Clean Audit 2014, announced by former Premier Ace Magashule, that did nothing to alleviate the crisis in the province. The acid test for the provincial government will be when voters take to the polls on the 8 May 2019, to prove to Eskom and the failing ANC that in a democracy, the taxpayers and residents are the most profound shareholders. Issued by James Letuka, DA Free State MPL, 4 March 2019