ICTU have shown Tiso Blackstar Group, that journalists are workers 15 March 2019 Information Communication Technology Union (ICTU) have shown Tiso Blackstar Group, that journalists are workers; parents and has rights just like any citizen within the republic, they too, falls under the working class thus ought to enjoy their constitutional protection. Background Tiso Black star was dragged moaning to the Commission for Conciliation Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) by ICTU, the only Progressive communication sector union in South African and it’s under SAFTU, after doors of engagements were totally shut by this media employer. ICTU has more than 250 members within the employ of this exploitive and non-democratized media group. Issues of non-payment and or skew payments of bonuses, salary disparity because of skin color are amongst other dominating issues that has caused the union (ICTU) and Tiso Blackstar Group (employer) to have their dispute of mutual interest; Salary Negotiations and organizational Rights before the CCMA on the 4th March 2019 and 12th March respectfully stayed unresolved. ICTU viewed the previous hard-stance of Tiso Blackstar group’s refusal to negotiate as very disappointing. To force the company into negotiating, one of the strategy was to setup a meeting with the Zondo commission and the SAFTU (South African federation of Trade Union) for their intervention to avoid robbing the citizens of South Africa their rights to know the daily end results of the State Capture. The state captured commission directly forced parties to meet and resolve their issues within 24 hours to avoid the consequences of the strike, the federation offer to mediate to avoid confrontation yielded results. The strike was to commence on the 14th March 20119; 06:00am in all province aiming at making sure that the weekend of the 16th and 17 2019 there will be no newspapers belonging to Tiso Blackstar group. Settlement of parties to the disputes The parties started their meeting at 08:30am facilitated by Dr. Zwelinzima Vavi. The union tabled the demands for almost 2hour and the company pleaded poverty which fall on death ears of the union, but finally at the end parties agreed on the following to prevent the much-awaited strike by members of ICTU in all provinces. 1. The bonuses pay of the 2017/18 will be concluded and possibly be paid to employees on or before the 10th of April 2019. 2. The salary negotiation will resume simultaneously with the bonuses since employee neve receive increase for the past 5 year and the union will submit to the employer their demand on Friday 15th march 2019 close of business. 3. The union was granted the Organizational Rights. 4. The further parties agreed that the strike is suspended immediately until the 10th of April 2019 with the intention to sign an agreement before and or mentioned date. 4. The parties with their mediator will review the progress made on the 25th March 2019. Issued by Origenous Mogoatlhe, Deputy President, Information Communication Technology Union, 15 March 2019