DA calls for SIU investigation into Mokgoro and Mahumapelo R100 million game scandal 6 March 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West has today written to President Ramaphosa and the Head of the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) requesting the promulgation into an R100 million game scandal which evidently implicates current Premier Job Mokgoro and his predecessor Supra Mahumapelo. The latest revelations indicate that Premier Mokgoro was allegedly aware of, and involved in, the so-called donation of 130 buffalo, 50 white rhino, 50 sable and 32 nyala to the value of about an R100 million to an alleged ANC connected company, the South African Rare Game Breeders Holdings. Mokgoro served as the chairperson of the North West Parks Board at the time this deal was struck. South African Rare Game Breeders Holdings is allegedly connected to the ANC through various other tender contracts with other companies sharing directorships. Again we see that instead of empowering emerging game farmers through such programmes, the corrupt ANC instead focussed on benefiting cadres and cronies under the guise of government programmes instead of hardworking and dedicated beneficiaries. After 25 years of failed ANC governance in the North West, it is evident that the ANC is corrupt to its core. The replacement of Mahumapelo with Mokgoro has brought no relief to the people of this province. This is another example that the ANC bus is broken and changing the driver makes no difference. The DA has long maintained that Premier Mokgoro is just another ANC cadre who cannot deliver on the expectations of good and honest governance, quality basic service delivery, and improving the lives of people. Portfolio committees at both the Provincial Legislature and well as Parliament have been dragging their feet in their investigations into this game deal for years now with no consequences for those implicated. The Parliamentary Portfolio committee merely condemned the department’s decision to donate the game. We are hopeful that an SIU investigation will bring closure to this matter and recover all losses in the interest of the people of the North West. The DA remains the only party in government that can turn the North West around and put the province back on track to reach its full socio-economic potential. The DA in government will first and foremost use government programmes intended to assist credible entrepreneurs for exactly such and not as a smokescreen to loot the state to enrich politically connected cadres and cronies and where such corruption takes place, ensure that the minimum jail sentence will be 15 years. Corrupt officials belong in jail and not in government. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 6 March 2019