COSATU calls on Minister Tito Mboweni to stop undermining President Cyril Ramaphosa and behaving like a Prime Minister of South Africa 4 March 2019 The Congress of South African Trade Unions has noted with deep concern the attacks directed at the Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane, by Minister Tito Mboweni, following her findings against the National Treasury director-general Dondo Mogajane. This follows the Public Protector’s findings that Mr Mogajane failed to reveal his criminal conviction that relates to a R4, 570 speeding fine conviction during his job application. The Public Protector has referred this matter of the Director-General to the office of President Cyril Ramaphosa to deal with it. It is, therefore, puzzling to see Minister Mboweni pontificating about it publicly and in the process attacking the public protector. COSATU calls on President Cyril Ramaphosa to act to stop Minister Mboweni from undermining his office and acting as a de facto Prime Minister. The Federation rejects the argument that investigating and disciplining the Director General of the National Treasury,Mr Dondo Mogajane will scare investors. This is not only ridiculous but it shows the exaggerated sense of self-importance that some in Treasury place on themselves. For a long time, we have noted the attempt in some quarters to create an impression that attacking ministers or officials from the National Treasury is tantamount to treason.  Minister Mboweni and some of his technocrats believe that they are above the law and that laws of his country or policies of the ruling party do not apply to them. The National Treasury is the same institution that is frustrating progress on the roll-out of the universal ­National Health Insurance (NHI), a comprehensive social security system, and that was staunchly opposed to the national minimum wage. President Ramaphosa should stop Minister Mboweni from undermining his office and should respond to the Public Protector’s recommendations. If there are grounds to charge or discipline Mr Moganjane, this should be done without fear or favour. The Public Protector should not allow herself to be intimidated by people who believe that they are above the laws of this country. The technocrats from the National Treasury should be held to the same standards as everybody else and should not be treated with any sense of exaggerated respect Issued by Sizwe Pamla, National Spokesperson, COSATU, 4 March 2019