Community safety celebrates partnership with religious fraternity to keep youth safe 7 March 2019 Today, Minister of Community Safety, Alan Winde commended the religious fraternity in the Province for its continued partnership with the Department, through the Youth Safety and Religious Partnership (YSRP) programme. This annual YSRP-programme, which is implemented during the June/July - and December/January holiday period, was first piloted during 2012/13, and targets young people between the ages of 14 – 21 years. The YSRP ensures that young people are provided a safe space where they participate in activities, such as life skills awareness and education, sport, recreation and vocational training. Since the programme’s inception, the Department has spent R29 131 285, partnered with 1205 approved institutions and reached 133 972 young people. Today, during an appreciation event, 3 organisations, the Fikelela Aids Project from Bonteheuwel, Promise Keepers from Khayelithsa and A-Z Helping Hands from Manenberg, made presentations about how this partnership is helping them to ensure that more young people are engaged in constructive and empowering activities. Minister Winde said: “The religious fraternity is well-established in all communities and if we are to combat crime and make the Western Cape the safest province in the country, we will require a whole of society approach, and this is why this partnership is so vital. They have a sound footprint in all areas, including those with high levels of crime, and in most cases are already implementing programmes in their respective communities. It concerns me deeply that there are still so many young people and especially children that are dying at the hands of heartless criminals, as gangs continue to terrorise our areas. The impact of a programme such as this is invaluable, as many young people are just looking for a safe and secure space, where they are able to play and have fun during the holiday.” During last year’s June/July - and December/January school holiday, the Department invested R6 219 829 in the YSRP-programme. Of the R3 962 365 allocation for the December/January programme, which reached 13 708 young people in 41 areas, R2 390 955 was allocated to areas that are riddled by high gang activity. For the June/July holiday period, the programme, which was implemented in 38 areas, reached 11 818 young people. The YSRP-programme is implemented in a wide variety of communities across the province, which among other include Atlantis, Belhar, Bishop Lavis, Bellville South, Delft, Elsies River, Grassy Park, Gugulethu, Kleinvlei, Kraaifontein, Kuilsriver, Langa, Mitchells Plain, Ocean View, Manenberg, Mfuleni, Cloetesville, De Rust, Dysselsdorp and Franschhoek. Minister Winde said: “We are stronger together and with a continued partnership, we can create a #SaferWesternCape. Issued by Marcellino Martin, Spokesperson for Minister Alan Winde, 7 March 2019