SACP delegation visits Venezuela 2 March 2019 The Second Deputy General Secretary of the South African Communist Party (SACP), Cde Chris Matlhako, and a member of the Party Central Committee and its Political Bureau, Jenny Schriner, are today departing to Venezuela. The visit is in line with the Central Committee statement, released on Sunday, 24 February 2019, expressing international solidarity with the just Bolivarian revolution and the people of Venezuela against imperialist aggression and attempts at undemocratic change of their government. The SACP is resolutely implementing its Central Committee resolution for the Party to continue and intensify its active expression of international solidarity with the people of Venezuela, Cuba and Nicaragua. The visit to Venezuela coincides with the sixth year since Hugo Chavez, former President of Venezuela, passed away. It therefore includes active participation in the commemoration planned to take place on 5 March 2019. On that day, millions of people across the world will participate in activities organised to express active solidarity with his successor, the current elected President of Venezuela, Nicolas Maduro, the government of Venezuela that he subsequently leads, and the people of Venezuela. SACP strongly condemns imperialist machination in Venezuela. The SACP strongly condemns the bogus humanitarian aid spearheaded by the United States and its imperialist allies, purportedly meant for the people of Venezuela. This so-called humanitarian aid, including the concert which was held on 22 February 2019 at the Colombia-Venezuelan border, bankrolled by billionaire Richard Bryanston, is nothing but part of the United States-led imperialist agenda of seeking to undemocratically change the government of Venezuela and impose an unelected individual, the so-called “self-proclaimed” interim president. On Saturday, 23 February 2019, Donald Trump’s administration tried to unlawfully and forcefully enter into Venezuelan territory with cargo, claiming to be carrying humanitarian aid. This attempt sought to undermine the rule of law in Venezuela, due processes and procedures, and was without the consent of the elected leadership of Venezuela. Trump’s intention was clearly to spark chaos and violence, by attempting to violate the territorial integrity of Venezuela and its national sovereignty. This was widely rejected by the people of Venezuela, who asserted their democratic right to self-determination. The violence which led to the death of four people is a direct result of the United States-led aggression. Statement issued by SACP, 2 May 2019