Today marks 4th anniversary since Ramaphosa promised South Africans “light at the end of the tunnel” on Eskom 20 March 2019 Today marks the fourth anniversary since Cyril Ramaphosa promised South Africans “light at the end of the tunnel” on the Eskom electricity crisis. As the country continues to buckle under the sustained and relentless pressures of the failing ANC’s rolling power blackouts – government is yet to provide South Africans with a clear plan of action to keep the lights on. On, 20 March 2015, then Deputy President Ramaphosa stated in Parliament that “We can say there will be light at the end of the tunnel. As we all know Eskom faces challenges and these challenges are being addressed”. It is now clear that this is a promised that will never be realised under the Presidency of Cyril Ramaphosa. As was the case back in 2015, as is the case now – the failing ANC cannot and does not know how to switch the lights back on. The country, over the past week, has been crippled by rolling blackouts and power failures. Instead of providing the country with answers, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan chose to plunge the country into further confusion through useless PowerPoint presentations. No amount of promises and talk shops will fix Eskom. What we need now is action. The collapse of Eskom lies squarely at the feet of the failing ANC. The currently electricity catastrophe has been sponsored by the ANC’s corruption and mismanagement and Ramaphosa’s silence and inaction. The ANC cannot be trusted to fix Eskom, and it is clear that the DA is the only party that can Eskom. Our governments across the country has been working tirelessly to mitigate the devastating effects of Eskom’s power failures – despite our limited mandate. This is why the DA Leader, Mmusi Maimane, announced that the party will lead a nationwide day of action on Friday the 29th of March. South Africans from all walks of life should join our call for immediate government action on this crisis. The only way Eskom can be fixed is to vote out the ANC government. Issued by Natasha Mazzone, DA Spokesperson on State Capture, 20 March 2019