Media Statement from North West Media Centre Corporate Communication and Liaison South African Police Service Potchefstroom: The North West Provincial Commissioner, Lieutenant General Baile Motswenyane welcomed the hefty sentences handed down to Pieter Dooreward, 27, and Phillip Schutte,34, by the North West High Court in Mahikeng today, 6 March 2019, among others for the murder of Matlhomola Mosweu of Coligny. The duo was arrested in April 2017 in Coligny and charged with murder of Matlhomola Mosweu. The latter was accused for stealing sunflower head from their employer’s farm. They were arrested after the Provincial Commissioner intervened and appointed a team to investigate an incident in which it was reported that Matlhomola died after jumping out of Dooreward and Schutte’s vehicle. The team was established after members of the community went on a rampage demanding the arrest of the pair and raising discomfort about the way the matter was handled by the local police station. During the protests, including after the accused were granted R5000-00 bail each, businesses were looted while private properties including houses and trucks were set alight. The court found the accused guilty on charges of murder, kidnapping, intimidation theft and pointing of firearm. They were sentenced as follows: Accused 1: Philip Doorewaard (27) Count one: Murder - 15 years imprisonment Count two: kidnapping - 3 years imprisonment Count three: Intimidation - 2 years imprisonment Count four: Theft - 1 year imprisonment Count seven: Pointing of firearm - 2 years imprisonment Count 2-7 will run concurrently. Mr Doorewaard will serve 18 years effectively in prison. Accused 2: Mr Phillip Schutte (34) Count one: Murder - 20 years imprisonment Count two: kidnapping - 3 years imprisonment Count three: Intimidation - 2 years imprisonment Count four: Theft - 1 year imprisonment Count seven: Pointing of firearm - 2 years imprisonment Count 2-7 will run concurrently. Mr Schutte will serve 23 years effectively in prison. The Provincial Commissioner commended the investigation team led by Brigadier Kgorane as well as the prosecution for their tireless efforts that contributed immensely towards the conviction. She said that the sentence will serve as deterrence and send a clear message that the long arm of the law will show no mercy to perpetrators of crime. Statement issued by SAPS North West, 6 March 2019