Pierneef painting theft implicating Magashule must not be swept under the carpet 13 March 2019 The DA is concerned that the issue of the alleged theft of a Pierneef painting valued at about R8 million from the Office of former Free State Premier Ace Magshule could be swept under the carpet. It is alleged that the painting was given to Mr Mettler, a bodyguard of Magashule, by him as a gift. A businessperson in Bloemfontein is alleged to have attempted to have the painting valuated by Strauss & Co for auction. This led to its identification as an asset of the Free State Provincial Government. The DA regards it as unlikely that this was done in error. The painting was taken to Magashule’s Bloemfontein residence and it was there that Magashule is alleged to have given it to Mettler as a gift. Attempts were then made to evaluate and sell the valuable painting. It is unlikely that a painting as valuable as this could accidentally land up in the hands of Ace Magashule. Soon after this, attempts were made to dispose of the valuable painting via auction which implies that the value of the painting was known. Magashule cannot claim that he did not know that a painting of this value was not his, and then give it away. Why did other Magashule bodyguards not get similar R8 million gifts? Further questions arise as to why Mettler did not alert Magashule to its value and then have it returned? A more likely scenario could be that it was taken from the Premier’s Office and given to Mettler, known to be a Magashule right-hand, to be sold. An initial question in the Legislature to the new Premier Sisi Ntombela indicated that an investigation was taking place without supplying a case number. The DA then posed another question to the MEC for Police, Roads and Transport in the Free State, Mr Sam Mashinini regarding this issue (see question and reply below). In reply, Mashinini indicated that the “alleged theft” of the Pierneef painting from the Office of the Premier in the Free State has been investigated and that the case was forwarded to the NPA for a decision. The painting has been returned to Office of the Premier. Given the NPA’s track record with investigations regarding politicians such as the withdrawal of cases against former MECs Mathabo Leeto and Benny Malakoane regarding corruption in Matjhabeng Municipality and the Vrede dairy case, the DA is concerned that this case involving the former Premier and current Secretary-General of the ANC could be swept under the carpet. Magashule’s legacy in the Free State continues long after his redeployment to Luthuli House. The DA will continue to monitor this investigation on behalf of the people of the Free State whose assets continue to be in danger from ANC cadres. 6. Hon. R Jankielsohn (DA) asks the Hon. MEC responsible for PR&T: Mr. S Mashinini. Whether the SAPS are investigating the alleged theft of a Pierneef painting from the office of the Premier, if not, why not, if so, (a) what is the relevant case number and (b) what is the progress and /or outcome of this investigation? RESPONSE (a) Yes, the SAPS is investigating the alleged Theft, as per Parkweg CAS 1362/10/2018 Theft of Pierneef painting to the value of 8 million rand. (b) Investigation was finalised. The Pierneef painting has been recovered and was handed over to the Office of the Premier. The case was forwarded to the Director Public Prosecution for decision. Issued by Roy Jankielsohn, DA MPL and Leader of the Opposition in the Free State Legislature, 13 March 2019