Eight arrests, 84 hotspots and scrapyards inspected 17 March 2019 The Rail Enforcement Unit (REU) made three arrests and inspected 84 hotspots and scrapyards this past week. This is in addition to the five suspects arrested by the PRASA Protection Services, SAPS Rapid Rail Response Unit and private security contractors. Read more below: The REU arrested three suspects for possession of dangerous weapons, suspected stolen property and malicious damage to property in Ravensmead, Elsies River, and Diep River. Furthermore, 588 stop-and-searches were conducted, and fines to the value of R8 300 were issued. Another five suspects were arrested and may be prosecuted in terms of the Criminal Matters Amendment Act which provides for stricter bail conditions and harsher sentences, including up to 30 years’ imprisonment, for those caught and convicted for destruction of essential infrastructure. There were 27 court appearances over the past week and bail was successfully opposed in all cases. The Metrorail Protection Services removes vagrants within the rail operating precincts on a rotational basis every week – this past week 75 vagrants were removed between Tygerberg and Parow and 26 structures dismantled between Salt River and Observatory. MPS, RRPU & PRIVATE SECURITY CONTRACTOR ACTIONS NUMBER DETAIL *REU ACTIONS NUMBER DETAIL  Arrests 5   Suspects arrested in terms of the Criminal Matters Amendment Act and malicious damage to property, being in possession of stolen property and suspected of rape  Arrests 3 Attempted theft, malicious damage to property, possession of stolen property  Trains patrolled 2 418  Focus on area central Autonomous operations 41   Confiscations 40  Knives, scissors and various tools used for cable theft Confiscations 3 Pickaxe Spade Dagga  Searches 989 For weapons and illegal substances Impoundments: Metal 10m PRASA cable  Legal Succession Act Schedule B (warnings/fines) 47 Keeping train doors open in transit, no valid ticket, travelling between carriages Fines – Traffic By-law, general 13 R7 500  Vagrants removed 75 Tygerberg – Parow Salt River – Observatory Cape Town Inspections of hotspot areas and scrapyards 84   Structures dismantled and removed 26 Salt River – Observatory Section 56 notices to appear in court 15   Joint operations 7 SAPS Nyanga, Bishop Lavis Harare and Khayelitsha Cluster, REU and Rapid Rail Response Unit Section 341 notices (fines) 0   Campaigns (safety, level crossing) 1 Koelenhof level crossing Stop-and-search actions 588   Court appearances and/or convictions 27 Bail was successfully opposed in all cases Complaints attended to 0   PRASA Protection Services is tasked to ensure Legal Succession Act compliance, crime prevention and commuter safety. * The Rail Enforcement Unit (REU) is a special security initiative funded by  PRASA, the City of Cape Town and  PGWC Department of Transport & Public Works) to focus on by-law compliance, metal theft prevention and to support SAPS Railway Police in the protection of commuters. Its 100 law enforcement officers are trained as Peace Officers with traffic warden and street survival skills and firearm competency and also focus on by-law compliance.  The Unit’s performance is reflected separately to monitor performance and assess feasibility.    ‘We have noted an increase in robberies, both at stations and on trains. The teams will address this as a matter of urgency to ensure that we nip it in the bud. I am encouraged that arrests have already been made and goods recovered,’ said Metrorail Western Cape Regional Manager, Richard Walker. ‘The City is well aware of residents’ frustration with traffic congestion and the impact it has on our economy. We’ve taken action in November 2015 already, when we committed to spending R750 million on road infrastructure projects over a period of five years. However, this alone will not solve the challenge. We need our passenger rail service to function efficiently so that we have fewer people relying on road-based transport. Our investment in the Rail Enforcement Unit which is focusing on the safety and security of commuters and the rail infrastructure is a serious commitment to improve the urban rail service in the short term. I’m heartened to say that the REU is making steady progress, together with the efforts from the PRASA Protection Services and SAPS Rapid Rail Response Unit,’ said the City’s Mayoral Committee Member for Transport, Alderman Felicity Purchase. ‘The REU’s stop-and-searches conducted at various hotspots have yielded positive results and the recovery of property and various weapons used to commit crimes. Their presence in these communities has been impactful, and will go a long way towards restoring commuter confidence in the system. The strides being made in improving safety and security within the rail network have increased optimism, and have made the problems experienced seemingly more surmountable,’ said Donald Grant, Western Cape Minister of Transport and Public Works and Chairperson of the Rail Management Task Team. The public can assist the REU by reporting crime and vandalism, as this forms part of the intelligence that drives deployment and operations. Illicit and suspicious activity may be reported to any number listed below: Metrorail Protection Services hot-line 021 449 4336/5056 RRPU Cape Town (platform 1) 021 443 4325 RRPU Bellville 021 941 6800 RRPU Philippi/Stock Road 021 370 1011 RRPU Retreat 021 710 5129 RRPU Radio Control/OPS room 021 449 4309/10 SAPS Crime Stop 0860 10111 Crime line SMS 32211 City of Cape Town Metals Theft Unit 0800 222 2771 Rewards of up to R25 000 are payable for information leading to successful conviction. Issued by Felicity Purchase, Spokesperson, City of Cape Town, 17 March 2019