YOU ARE INVITED TO THE LAUNCH OF DEMOCRACY WORKS 27 March 2019 Villa Arcadia, Hollard Campus, 1 Federation Road, Parktown 18h00 With Greg Mills, President Olusegun Obasanjo, Tendai Biti and President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf RSVP to Leila.Jack@thebrenthurstfoundation.org *** Democracy Works: Rewiring Politics to Africa’s Advantage (Picador/Hurst/OUP, Johannesburg/London/New York, 2019) The Brenthurst Foundation is delighted to announce the publication of Democracy Works, a sequel to the best-selling Making Africa Work. Based on more than 300 interviews across Africa, Asia, the Americas and Europe with policy-makers, politicians and analysts, Democracy Works explores how we can learn to nurture and deepen democracy in Africa to ensure economic growth and political stability. Drawing on the considerable policy experience of its four authors – former Nigerian president Olusegun Obasanjo, Greg Mills, Jeffrey Herbst and the former Zimbabwean finance minister Tendai Biti, it identifies a ‘democratic playbook’ to meet the threats to free and fair elections. But substantive democracy demands more than simply regular polls. Democracy is fundamentally about the inner working of institutions, the rule of law, separation of powers, checks and balances, and leadership in government and civil society, as much as it is about values and the welfare and well-being of its citizens. It also demands that local leadership has a plan for the country beyond simply winning the popular vote. Democracy Works is directed toward leaders and citizens who want to address the extreme demographic and other challenges that Africa faces. ‘Ethiopia shows – as does this handbook for democrats – that democracy and development are indivisible.’ - Hailemariam Desalegn, former prime minister, Ethiopia ‘Clear, concise, incisive … Democracy Works deciphers a complex topic in explaining when democratic transitions stick and why democracy works better than the alternatives.’ - Mcebisi Jonas, Presidential Investment Envoy, South Africa ‘Packed with powerful ideas, valuable insights and persuasive analysis, this book is essential reading for anyone who cares about politics in Africa.’ - Nic Cheeseman, University of Birmingham; author of How to Rig an Election GREG MILLS heads the Johannesburg-based Brenthurst Foundation; OLUSEGUN OBASANJO is a former president of Nigeria; JEFFREY HERBST is the president of the American Jewish University; and TENDAI BITI is a former finance minister of Zimbabwe. For further details, please contact Katy Roxburgh: Katy.Roxburgh@sabistrategy.com Direct: +44 (0) 203 880 9293 Mobile: +44 (0) 7792 819 834 