Makhura misleads public on GP government contracts with Bosasa-linked companies 19 March 2019 Despite the fact that Gauteng Premier David Makhura has publicly indicated that his failing ANC-led Gauteng administration will be terminating all contracts with Bosasa-linked companies, he has not taken full responsibility for his government’s dealings with Bosasa. Over the past 15 years the Gauteng Provincial Government has spent in excess of R550.4 million on Bosasa-linked companies. Gauteng Finance MEC, Barbara Creecy indicated that the relatively new department of e-Government spent R900 000.00 on one of these companies. The bulk of this money, R537 642 229.00, was spent by the Gauteng Department of Social Development, while the Gauteng Department of Education has spent R12 895 852.00. The termination of these contracts is not enough. Some of these contracts are set to continue until 2021, yet neither the Premier nor MEC Creecy have yet indicated what impact termination will have on service delivery, nor the financial implications of cancelling existing contracts. It is disingenuous of this administration to claim that it takes a tough stance on corruption when it has been aiding and abetting a known corrupt organization for years. This is highlighted by the fact that under Makhura, the money spent on Bosasa-linked companies has increased four-fold when compared to his predecessor, Nomvula Mokonyane. Under Makhura money spent on BOSASA has increased from 108 million to R537 million more than 300%! In 2017, Makhura established an anti-corruption advisory council, yet to date, there has been no indication as to what this Council has done and what action has been taken against corrupt officials in the Gauteng Government. The failing ANC-led administration in Gauteng has a notoriously poor track record on holding individuals to account and taking action. This administration lacks the political will to do what is right for the people of Gauteng. The DA will ensure that this matter does not fall off the agenda as was seen with scandals such as Life Esidimeni. When the DA takes over government in Gauteng, we will establish a Commission of Inquiry into state capture in the province to identify and expose the network of patronage that has paralysed government in this province and ensure that those responsible are charged and send to jail. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Premier Candidate, 19 March 2019