DA reports unethical and rude MEC Mazibuko to IEC 14 March 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is disturbed by the audio published by the AmaBhungane Centre for Investigative Journalism where the Gauteng MEC for Sports , Arts, Culture and Recreation (SACR), Faith Mazibuko is heard swearing and threatening and racially attacking her staff members, demanding the erection of combi courts. It’s disturbing that the MEC demands that her staff members deliver combi courts so that she can use them to win votes for the ANC. She further tells her staff members to flaunt rules in order to ensure the delivery of the combi courts that she promised to communities. This recording clearly shows that this department is failing to adhere to the supply chain management process and that there is no accountability and transparency in tender processes. The goal is to win votes at all costs. This again shows the ANC’s disregard for the people’s money. The ANC is a criminal syndicate, which uses the people’s money to stay in power, enrich itself and people close to the organization. We will therefore refer this recording to the IEC for it to investigate the abuse of public money for party political purposes. MEC Mazibuko lacks the skills and competencies required to lead this department. She is rude to her staff members and there is an element of racial and gender discrimination which goes against government’s policies. Such treatment of employees goes against the Employment Act. The Department of SACR under the leadership of MEC Mazibuko has consistently failed to meet its own targets and underspends on its allocated budget. It is surprising that the department that has failed to deliver libraries and sporting facilities timeously wants to push for the delivery of combi courts to fool voters into voting for the ANC. This incident indicates how desperate the ANC in Gauteng is to win votes. Gauteng residents are tired of empty promises and the lack of service delivery from the failing ANC government. Gauteng residents are going to punish the ANC at the ballot box on the 8 May 2019 when they vote for Change by voting for the DA. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Premier Candidate, 14 March 2019