MEC Lesufi visited Crystal Park High School following a video of a learner assault 11 March 2019 The Gauteng MEC for Education, Mr Panyaza Lesufi, today 11 March 2019 visited Crystal Park High School following a viral video footage of a Grade 9 learner being attacked by five learners (four Grade 9 and one Grade 8). The incident which occurred last week Wednesday, 06 March 2019, was captured and circulated by fellow learners. Preliminary investigations revealed that an argument ensued earlier during school, subsequently leading to the fight after school about 30 meters from the school premises.  All parents of the implicated learners were called to the school to discuss the disciplinary processes. The alleged perpetrators have since been placed on precautionary suspension since Thursday, 07 March 2019, pending the disciplinary hearing to be facilitated in due course. MEC Lesufi informed learners that, he advised SGB not to rush, to facilitate the said disciplinary hearing, so that perpetrators stay at home longer and learn from their ill-discipline and shocking behaviour. Our Psychosocial team is currently at the school to provide necessary counselling to the victim. This support will also be extended to the perpetrators who are currently on suspension. It must be noted that, the parent of the victim, reported this incident to the Police who arrested all perpetrators and released them to their parents’ custody. Police are investigating this matter. “Ill-discipline will never be allowed to persist in our schooling environment. We urge all our learners to refrain from acts of misconduct in schools; and implore parents to assist the department in instilling learner discipline in and outside the school environment,” said MEC Panyaza Lesufi. The department strongly condemns this barbaric act by learners. We have a policy of zero tolerance to any form of misconduct. Anyone found to be transgressing this policy is dealt with in line with South African Schools Act (SASA) code of conduct, which governs all schools. Schools are urged to enforce their codes of conduct to deal with all disciplinary matters. Learner assault at Edenvale High School Meanwhile, the department condemns an assault of a Grade 9 girl learner by a fellow girl learner in the same grade at Edenvale High School. The incident occurred on Friday, 15 February 2019, during break time. The perpetrator was precautionary suspended with immediate effect, pending the disciplinary hearing in due course. Both parents of the implicated learners were notified of the disciplinary processes. Psycho social support has already been provided to the victim, who unfortunately sustained minor jaw injuries. This support will also be extended to the perpetrator. Issued by Steve Mabona, Spokesperson, Gauteng Department of Education, 11 March 2019