DA pressures Free State Government to request R533 million drought relief 19 March 2019 Last week, the Acting Head of Department for the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, Dr Takisi Masiteng, indicated that the province required about R533 million for drought relief for the agricultural sector. This request would be submitted to the national government through the Free State Department of Co-operative Governance that is responsible for disaster management in the province. On 17 January I wrote to both the Premier, Ms Sisi Ntombela, and MEC for Agriculture and Rural Development, Dr Benny Malakoane, urgently requesting that the Free State be declared a provincial drought disaster area. This request received a positive response from the provincial government. This declaration is an important step in the process of allocating additional resources to the province to mitigate the effects of the disaster. The agricultural sector remains the foundation of economic development and employment for our people in rural communities. This sector is not limited to agricultural production but has a significant value chain that is crucial for local economies in rural towns and communities. The agricultural sector in the Free State adds great value to national food security since 39% of dry beans, 34% of grain Sorgham, 45% of ground nuts, 38% of soya, 58% of sunflower, 28% of maize, 16% of wheat and 19% of beef and sheep respectively that are produced nationally are from the Free State. The DA regards our farmers (subsistence, emerging and commercial) as provincial and national assets who require support from their government. Food is a basic necessity for the survival of all humans and animals on earth, and it is our farmers who produce the agricultural commodities that feed and clothe us. The DA will submit additional questions on the drought relief to the MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Oupa Khoabane, to obtain further details on the province’s request to the national government for drought relief assistance. Issued by Roy Jankielsohn, DA MPL and the leader of the opposition in the Free State Legislature, 19 March 2019