Msimanga meets new Police Commissioner on ways to fight crime 6 March 2019 Today, the Democratic Alliance (DA) Gauteng Leader John Moodey and I met with the newly appointed Gauteng Police Commissioner, Lieutenant General Elias Mawela. In our meeting with the Commisisoner, we realised that there are still good men and women in the South African Police Service (SAPS) who are committed to keeping us safe. The Commissioner elaborated extensively on his plans for policing in the province and his commitment to increase the police force. We wish the Commissioner well in his endeavours. People in the province have a lack of confidence in the SAPS. In engaging with different communities in the province, we have heard from people all over that they feel unsafe in their homes and that they have lost trust in the SAPS to protect them. More than 620 000 crimes were reported in Gauteng in 2018, however indications are that people are becoming less reluctant to report crime because of their lack of trust in the SAPS. It is unacceptable that crime is increasing while the SAPS are under-resourced, poorly trained and under-staffed. South Africans no longer feel safe in their own homes. The DA has a plan for policing when it takes over control of Gauteng. We will: Lobby for police competency to be given to the province in order to better address local needs; Push for the return of specialised units, such as those which combat gang violence, hijacking, rural and organised crime; Appoint a Provincial Police Ombudsman to resolve complaints and ensure effective community oversight over policing; Lobby for a ring-fenced budget to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) to eradicate internal corruption; Monitor and track dockets to ensure that they are investigated and prosecuted effectively; Make crime statistics and safety information public every two months by developing a computerized Crime Information System; Increase road safety by making traffic police an essential service so that they are available at all hours, and roll out road safety campaigns along the Western Cape model; Push for speedy discipline and prosecution of corrupt police to ensure a professional and honest service; Fix delays at Gauteng forensic mortuaries to ensure speedy handover of bodies to families and quality evidence that can stand up in court; and Decisively tackle gender-based violence through dedicated programmes for victims. If we are to win the fight against crime, we deserve an honest and professional police service that is transparent and honest. Only the DA can bring change that builds One South Africa for All. Issued by Solly Msimanga, Gauteng Premier Candidate, 6 March 2019