MEC Lesufi visited Mondeor High School following a fatal stabbing of a learner 13 March 2019 The Gauteng MEC for Education, Mr Panyaza Lesufi, is deeply shocked and saddened by the death of a 19-year-old Grade 11 learner from Mondeor High School. The MEC today visited the said school following this morning’s stabbing incident, whereby the deceased learner was accosted on his way to school. It is encouraging that some community members submitted video footages which will assist the police investigation on what might have happened and who committed this heinous crime. Accordingly, police will follow-up on some information which seems to implicate some learners from a nearby school. We believe that leads provided to the police will assist them to crack this case swiftly so that perpetrators will be brought to book. “It is saddening that instead of giving report cards I will be giving a death certificate to these parents. We take this time to send our heartfelt condolences to the family, friends and the school community of the said learner, during this time of grief. No words are enough to express our sorrow at a loss of a child. We hope that the family will find comfort in the knowledge that we too share their loss”, said MEC Panyaza Lesufi. MEC Lesufi addressed learners and educators to convey his sincere condolences and assured them that the Psychosocial Team is currently at the school and has commenced with counselling and will continue to provide necessary support to the school community. Among others, MEC Lesufi appealed with learners not to opt for revenge but assist with necessary information that may be helpful to the police. In the midst of the tragedy, the school continued with curriculum under the circumstance, educators played a significant role in managing to contain the situation. “I am grateful for the leadership of the Principal and her staff members, for doing everything within their powers to contain the situation, because if it was at another school, probably learners would have left immediately in the morning”, said MEC Panyaza Lesufi. For more information, contact the Gauteng Department of Education’s Spokesperson, Steve Mabona on 072 574 3860. Issued by Steve Mabona, Spokesperson, the Gauteng Department of Education, 13 March 2019