Wage negotiations deadlocked at SARS 1 March 2019 The National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union [NEHAWU] has reached a deadlock with the South African Revenue Services [SARS] in wage negotiations. The matter has been referred to Commission for Conciliation Mediation and Arbitration [CCMA] and the set-down date is the 8th March 2019. Negotiations at SARS started in November 2018 after the consolidated mandates of our members were tabled to the employer. The negotiations have been ongoing for the past four months without any progress and as such we reached a deadlock in the bargaining forum. On the 25th February 2019 as NEHAWU we elected to declare a dispute when it became apparent that the employer was not prepared to give in to the demands that we have presented. The following are the issues that our members wants the employer to address: ·       Salary increase of 12%. ·       Single term agreement ·       Recognition of improved qualification ·       Long service awards ·       Performance bonus policy ·       Retirement exit gift ·       Leave: Discretionary leave; study leave; Family Responsibility Leave; Annual Leave; Pre-natal and Vaccination leave ·       Withdrawal of the December 2018 internal newsflash by the employer that was withdrawing the bursary, leave encashment, bonus and performance bonus. ·       Debt Management dispute wherein the employer is refusing to translate Employees on Grade 4A performing on Grade 5A Job as per the job evaluation outcomes. The unfortunate part is that we are negotiating with a very arrogant employer who in the midst of the negotiations decided to issue a news flash that withdraws the benefits that our members have been already enjoying, the following are the benefits referred to: leave encashment, bursary, bonuses and performance bonuses. The union is currently convening membership meetings to source a mandate on the dispute and a way forward since negotiations have collapsed. Issued by Khaya Xaba, Media Liaison Officer, NEHAWU, 1 March 2019