The killing of women is a national crisis – IFP calls for reopening of debate on death penalty 3 September 2019 It is with deep sadness that our country finds itself at a crossroads when women and young girls are facing war on our streets. It is with a heavy heart that on behalf of the IFP I extend our sincerest condolences to the families, friends and loved ones of the recent victims of rape, murder and abuse. As a father and husband, the recent spate of killings and rape across the country, in particular during Women’s Month has had a profound impact on myself and my family. Therefore, today the IFP in Parliament will retable a motion to debate the reinstatement of the death penalty as a deterrent to heinous crimes nationally. The killing and raping of women who in fact make up the backbone of our society is unacceptable. The tragic rape and killing of 19-year-old UCT Student, Uyinene Mrwetyana and 14-year-old Janika Mallo, who was raped and found with her head bashed-in in her grandmother's yard on Sunday is chilling and must be condemned in the strongest possible terms. It appears that the justice system in trying to hand down harsher sentences has not stopped or sent out a clear message to monsters who prey on vulnerable women, young girls and children. The moral degradation we see today must be addressed as we cannot allow ongoing attacks against women to take place in the South Africa we envisage for all of us to live in. Women and children must be and feel safe. Indeed, we need a national discourse amongst all men who believe in good to stand up against the violence against women. In doing our part the IFP will establish various Men’s Fora in all our party structures to drive a grassroots movement to address the root causes and create greater awareness on femicide and the role men play in fighting the scourge of violence. We encourage all organized bodies and political parties to follow suit. The tragic killings must stop. The reinstatement of the death penalty will certainly send out a message that “if anyone dares to rape or take the life of a women or a child, justice will take theirs!”. Issued by Velenkosini Hlabisa, Inkatha Freedom Party President, 3 September 2019