IFP welcomes the move to prioritise South African doctors 11 September 2019 The IFP welcomes the move by the MEC of Health Department in KwaZulu-Natal Honourable Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu to stop the hiring of foreign doctors to accommodate South African doctors. The IFP confirmed this move through an internal circular dated 4 September 2019 where the Department states that it has taken a decision to suspend the recruitment and employment of foreign health professionals in particular foreign doctors to accommodate South African doctors especially those trained in Cuba. The party discovered through a response to the questions asked by Hon Mntomuhle Khawula to the KZN Department of Health, about how many foreign national doctors are employed by the department in the province. The department responded by saying that they are 336 from 57 different countries. This is victory for the IFP; on behalf of all unemployed doctors who are struggling to get employment and are already dealing with the negative social impact and financial stress that unemployment brings. We reiterate that the IFP does not have a problem with other countries providing jobs regarded as scarce skills to our country. This should however, not happen to the detriment of the citizens of our country. It is a fact that KwaZulu-Natal remains with loads of health professionals who are remaining at home with qualifications unemployed. It is the duty of the government and every organisation doing business in this country to always prioritise South African skills to curb the issue of unemployment and poverty. The IFP will continue its role of oversight in this regard and urges all government departments to follow suit. The IFP leader of the official opposition in Kwazulu-Natal, who is now the President of IFP, Hon V.F Hlabisa, committed to the IFP providing effective oversight over the government of KwaZulu-Natal. He also committed the IFP to joining hands with the Provincial government for the benefit of the people of KwaZulu-Natal. The IFP is delivering in that commitment. Issued by Mntomuhle Khawula, IFP Member of KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Legislature, 11 September 2019