Statement of the Gauteng Provincial Government on violent protests 3 September 2019 The Gauteng Provincial Government condemns in the strongest possible terms all violent protests and destruction of property around the province. There can be no justification for the use of violence, looting and vandalisation of property, even if people may have genuine issues to raise. Over the past few days, violent protests accompanied by looting of shops, burning and vandalisation of property and vehicles were reported in parts of Johannesburg, Tshwane, Tembisa, Germiston and have since spread to other areas of Gauteng. Government will not tolerate any lawlessness and will take decisive action to restore peace and stability. The South African Police Service and other law enforcement agencies are already working on the ground in all affected areas and have apprehended a significant number of people implicated in the orchestration of violent protests and looting. Calm has been restored in a number of areas that were seriously affected by the violent protests and government will continue to monitor the situation. Premier David Makhura and MECs are currently visiting various hotspots and will take appropriate action to ensure that the situation returns to normalcy. Leaders of political parties represented in the Provincial Legislature are also working with the Premier. Government has a duty to protect the people and property and will act decisively to prevent any further acts of violence and vandalization of property. The provincial government has also noted the circulation of fake news and videos on various social media platforms. Government will continue to keep the public updated on the situation and cautions against the spreading of false reports. The Gauteng Provincial Disaster Management Centre is currently conducting an assessment in the affected areas and will advise the provincial government on any humanitarian assistance that can be offered to those adversely impacted by the violence. Issued by Thabo Masebe on behalf of the Gauteng Provincial Government, 3 September 2019