ANC calls for speedy justice for Uyinene Mrwetyana 3 September 2019 The African National Congress (ANC) calls on.the law-enforcement agencies to ensure swift justice for Ms Uyinene Mrwetyana. The brutal rape and murder of Uyinene has touched the conscience of the nation in a profound way. This national tragedy confirms that gender-based violence is not only pervasive in our society, but has also reached unacceptable levels. As a nation, we must boldly declare with one united voice, that the spate of gender-based violence taking place across the length and breadth of our land must stop. We mustvsend an unequivocal message that violence against women will not be tolerated in our free and democratic society. We call on our criminal justice system to leave no stone unturned and do everything possible and permissible by law to ensure that Uyinene and many other victims of crime get justice. The perpetrator of this heinous crime must face the full wrath of our criminal justice system. We wish to reiterate our call to our courts to ensure that they impose the harshest possible sentence against those found guilty of women and child abuse. This will send a clear message to all would-be perpetrators that our society and the justice system will not tolerate these crimes. As South Africans, we must be concerned at the growing reports of women who continue to die at the hands of men. As a country we need to wage a sustained and effective campaign against gender-based violence. The progranne arising from last year's summit led by the President must be sustained and given more momentum. As individuals and organised formations, we must make a solemn commitment that we will do whatever it takes to fight and defeat the scourge of violence against women and children. A successful war against gender-based violence is dependent on the partnership between government and various sectors of society, including the media. As the ANC, we believe that the unacceptably high levels of gender-based violence require the collective efforts of all South Africans. We must therefore mobilize all members of the community to join in this effort. When we know that someone is being abused in our own home or in our neighbour's house, we have a duty to report it. We also have a duty to stand in court as witnesses to make sure that these abusers are prosecuted successfully. As the ANC, we add our voice to those who say: Enough is enough! The ANC sends its heartfelt condelences to the family, friends and fellow students of Uyinene. We wish them.strength during this painful time. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 3 September 2019