DA takes action against Limpopo Freedom Front Plus Leader for use of K-word 26 September 2019 Today, Thursday 26 September 2019, I laid criminal charges against the Limpopo Freedom Front Plus Leader and Member of the Provincial Legislature, Marcelle Maritz, for using the K-word when referring to the APK Church as the "Church without K****rs. I was accompanied by DA Limpopo Provincial Chairperson, Geoffrey Tshibvumo. See photo here. We also reported Maritz to the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) and we’ve written to the Limpopo Legislature’s Ethics Committee to investigate this matter. See letter here. We note that the FF+ has stated that the video was taken 5 years ago, however, the timestamp on the video that was shared to us by a whistle-blower clearly shows that this video was taken in 2017 whilst Maritz was the Limpopo Freedom Front Plus Leader and a PR Councillor in the Mogalakwena Municipality. See timestamp here. The whistle-blowers confirmed that this is when the video was shot and that the allegations by Maritz are a blatant lie. The witnesses in the video will also be submitting an affidavit in this regard with the provision that their identities be protected. We will hand the affidavit over to SAPS and the SAHRC. In our fight for reconciliation we cannot ignore instances like this. The reality is that the DA has never shied away from taking action against any person who has made racist remarks in the past. We have previously laid charges against people like Julius Malema, BLF leader Andile Mngxitama, Adam Catzavelos, and recently Ace Magashule for their despicable, racist comments. We will not condone any form of racism, no matter where it comes from. The DA realises that we are a diverse country with various backgrounds and cultures and we will take action against any individual who doesn’t respect our Constitution and our path to reconciliation. We need leaders in society to unite us in our diversity and care about the well-being of all South Africans, despite their race, gender or religious beliefs. Leaders in our society and especially leaders of political parties should set an example to the rest of South Africans. The task to unite South Africans rest squarely on all of our shoulders as our role should be to unite and not divide. Our role as Leaders should be to build a better future instead of spreading hate and division. The DA will consistently be committed to unite South Africans and to create a society which is free from racism. We will continue to stand up for the rights of every South African without any fear or favour. Issued by Beyers Smit, DA Member of NCOP, 26 September 2019