EFF notes the testimony at the Zondo Commission against a journalist paid by State Security, R Munusamy 18 September 2019 The EFF notes the testimony led by HAWKS officer Col Kobus Roelofse at the State Capture Commission of Inquiry that Tiso Blackstar journalist Ranjeni Munusamy's car was paid by a secret slush fund of Crime Intelligence. We are not shocked nor surprised, but simply affirmed as we have been warning society against this reality. The EFF has always indicated that there are journalists who are working with politicians through the Rouge Unit and Secret Intelligence operatives to pursue political opponents of Pravin Gordhan. Many more will be revealed who are on a payroll of State Security and other secret intelligence organisations. The EFF's decision to stop interacting with media units like amaBhungane and Scorpio, as well as the Daily Maverick is because we know these units work with Illegal Intelligence operatives linked largely with the Rogue Unit. This is particularly signified by the type of information they have to write against their subjects. Such information can only be accessed through usage of highly specialised Intelligence equipment's and devices. We also know that our CIC Julius Malema and the Deputy President Floyd Shivambu have been victims of State Security operatives linked to the Rogue Unit. They have pursued illegal operations against them in an attempt to strengthen the general campaign to discredit their public standing as revolutionaries. Many of these operations and their agents in the media will be uncovered and exposed in due time. Munusamy is not alone, neither is the payment of her car the only one. These journalists have been compensated in very sophisticated ways to also try and hide the fact of their collaboration with covert Intelligence operations. We reiterate that we shall never treat journalists who are embedded and in employ of StratCom strategies to undermine our revolution. We shall proudly boycott them and stop all interactions with them We also call on SARS to investigate if Munusamy paid her taxes on all the monies she got from the intelligence. Issued by Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, National Spokesperson, EFF, 18 September 2019