EFF calls on immediate action on Major General Deena Moodley following allegations of abuse of Crime Intelligence slush fund 22 September 2019 The EFF calls for the immediate suspension and internal disciplinary action on Major-General Deena Moodley following revelations of his abuse of Crime Intelligence Slush Fund. The Sunday Independent has revealed how a pseudo-covert operation was established under the dictation of General Major-General Deena Moodley, masquerading as infiltration of the EFF and the #FeesMustFall Movement, yet used to loot the Crime Intelligence Slush Fund. We call on the SAPS and Minister of Police to immediately place Major-General Deena Moodley under suspension and take disciplinary action for what is obviously a crime of theft and corruption. It is a fact that a lot of intelligence operations have been abused for personal benefit by high ranking SAPS officials. This is one example which must be openly dealt with as it has nothing to do with intelligence but looting of public resources for personal benefit. The EFF has long called for the establishment of the Parliament Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence so that intelligence divisions and their leadership can be held accountable. The absence of such a body means Crime Intelligence, Defence Intelligence and State Security are not being held accountable as per the requirements of the constitution. We reiterate our call for the Speaker of National Assembly to comply with the constitution and establish this committee. Should she fail to do so, we shall approach a court of law to force her to comply. This delayed formation of the portfolio committee on JSCI in light of many intelligence failures in our country, including allegations of corruption is a sign that the ANC led 6th Democratic Parliament has not broken from the corrupt habits of the Zuma years. Parliament, under the Zuma led ANC, always ensured that the executive is not subjected to rigorous scrutiny; Thandi Modise is just another Baleka Mbete, occupying the highest sit in parliament to protect the executive from being held accountable. Issued by Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, National Spokesperson, EFF, 22 September 2019