ANC supports President Ramaphosa and efforts to end gender-based violence and other incidents of public violence 5 September 2019 The African National Congress (ANC) welcomes President Cyril Ramaphosa's address to the nation this evening. The ANC, as well as the overwhelming majority of South Africans, share the President's grief and turmoil about the violence in our country. We also share his sentiment that we will succeed in creating a society that is caring, humane, and people-centred. We call on all South Africans to lend their support to the ANC government's efforts to end gender-based violence. We welcome the commitment to ensure that the criminal justice system metes out harsher sentences against perpetrators of violence against women. We welcome the recognition that violence against women is a national crisis which has reached unacceptable levels. This, therefore, requires urgent interventions and extraordinary measures. The President's call to men to take responsibility is highly commendable. His genuine and honest reaching out to women rnust be emulated by all men. We call on our criminal justice system to be ruthless and firm in dealing with perpetrators of women abuse. They must face the full wrath of our criminal justice system. Our courts must impose the harshest possible sentence against those found guilty of women and child abuse. We support the call for life sentences in the case of rape. This will send a clear message to all would-be perpetrators that our society and the justice system will not tolerate these crimes. We call on all South Africans and their organised fornations to join government efforts and help wage a sustained and multifaceted campaign against gender-based violence. A successful war against gender-based violence is dependent on a partnership between government and various sectors of society, including the media. As the ANC, we pledge to mobilize all our members and structures to join in this effort. We add our voice to those who say: Enough is Enough! Consitent with the President's call, the ANC also condemns in the strongest possible terms violent protests that are accompanied by lawlessness and looting directed at foreign nationals in parts of the country. These incidents constitute criminal acts which should be abhorred by all peace-loving South Africans. In this regard, we welcome the President's commitment that no-one breaking the law and engaging in criminal activity will be tolerated. There are many who do not want a united Africa, and celebrate any division. The ANC and our President are clear in our resolve that we remain committed to our continent. No amount of fomenting of divisions will diminish our view that we are all Africans. The ANC commends members of the South African Police Service (SAPS) for their swift action in arresting those alleged to have engaged in violence and other criminal activities. The ANC government will do everything in its power to maintain order and stability. Law-enforcement agencies must act against those who show no respect for the laws of the country. The police must continue to enforce the law without fear or favour, whether the perpetrator is South African or a foreign national. As the ANC, we regard the President's address as marching orders and a call to action. We are determined to continue the struggle for African unity and the war on male violence against women. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 5 September 2019