Response to the Public Protector's report – Robert McBride 25 September 2019 As the former Executive Director of Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID), I have noted the final report of the Public Protector (PP) dealing with, amongst others, ‘Allegations of Maladministration, Improper Conduct and Abuse of Power’ that were made against me. The final report was received on Monday morning, 23 September 2019, by my attorneys, and I intend consulting with my attorneys after studying the report. The majority of the report deals with a complaint that was identical to, was previously investigated by the Public Service Commission (PSC). The PSC found the complaint to be unsubstantiated. It seems the PP failed to take this investigation into consideration. The PP’s report is clearly reviewable. It is irrational as the findings cannot be reconciled with the facts. In essence, the PP’s report is an erosion of IPID’s independence and is likely to interrupt IPID’s investigations into industrial scale corruption and looting within the South African Police Service (SAPS), as the PP report spuriously implicates most of IPID’s executive members. It is clear that the intention is to disrupt the functioning of the IPID. The timing is also suspicious in that the release is on the eve of the widely anticipated testimony of senior IPID investigators at the Zondo Commission into State Capture, which evidence started today. IPID must defend its independence. IPID must also defend its employees against this fight back campaign. If not, IPID will become a tool in the hands of the corrupt and succumb to political pressure. Prior to my attorneys receiving the report formally, I had no sight thereof. Rather it was leaked to the officials in SAPS Crime Intelligence, the media and various IPID employees. It should also be noted that there is a criminal investigation against the complainant in this matter, members of Crime Intelligence and the “General Mabula team”, and that the investigation is currently with the Director for Public Prosecution for decision. Apart from the pending criminal investigation, the complainant was also found to be an unreliable witness by a court of law. I am also aware of numerous engagements between the complainant and individuals in Crime Intelligence, the team from the SAPS North West, headed by General Ntebo ‘Jan’ Mabula, who is currently under investigation by the IPID (for torture and murder) and senior officials in the Police Ministry. I will approach the High Court for an interdict against any remedial actions directed against me by the PP and take this highly questionable report on review. Issued by Adrian Lackay on behalf of Robert McBride, 25 September 2019