DA to submit PAIA application for investigating documents into the Gupta-linked Chad-Denel deal 23 September 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) will submit an application, in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act (PAIA), to receive access to the preliminary investigation documents report pertaining to the unlawful Gupta-linked deal which Denel entered into with Chad. Reports over the weekend showed that Denel has failed to supply R250 million worth of army vehicles to the government of Chad, despite having been paid a R100 million deposit almost two years ago. Chad has since cancelled the contract and demanded its deposit back from the cash-strapped arms company - this has impaired South Africa’s relations with Chad. It is in the best interest of the South African public that finding of the investigation into this cash strapped State Owned Enterprise (SOE) be made public. This will ensure that any of these damning findings that pinpoint several senior officials and politicians are not be buried. Denel is another in a long line of SOEs which are crippled due to years of ANC mismanagement and corruption. A massive amount of the people’s money have been wasted on SOEs and yet the public is getting very little in return. Through the PAIA application, the DA is making it clear to this Embattled SOE that we will not compromise on our commitment for transparency and accountability and no protection should be given to corrupt cadres and officials. The DA will also be submitting Parliamentary Questions, to the Minister of Public Enterprises, Pravin Gordhan, to find out if there is any other similar contracts, which Denel cannot deliver on. The DA will continue to fight for the rooting out of corruption in all SOEs  and will not back down until all implicated government officials are brought to book for their abuse of state resources. We need to stop the continued misuse of SOEs for political gain and those found guilty, must be held accountable to the full extent of the law. Issued by Natasha Mazzone, DA Shadow Minister of Public Enterprises, 23 September 2019