Sanral e-toll collection down to R687.7 million, shows system must be scrapped 29 September 2019 The fact that the South African National Roads Agency (Sanral) has only managed to collect R687.7 million for the 2018/2019 financial year compared to the previous year when they were able to collect R1.87 billion once again shows that e-tolls are not working and should be scrapped. This information was revealed in Sanral’s integrated annual report, which also indicated that the entity raised an impairment of R10.04 bullion on its total e-toll trade. Motorists in Gauteng have refused to pay for e-tolls since it was implemented in 2013. It is high-time that a solution is found to e-tolls in Gauteng. At the end of August, the National Minister of Transport was supposed to make an announcement regarding e-tolls but instead asked for extra time to consult with all stakeholders on the matter. A month has now passed, and we are still waiting to hear what the solution to e-tolls will be. The DA has been against the implementation of e-tolls as it is an unfair tax burden on our residents who are struggling to make ends meet. If no solution is found to e-tolls, then Sanral will see a further decrease in the collection of e-toll debt. e-Tolls must be scrapped sooner rather than later. The DA will continue to put pressure on Premier David Makhura to lodge an intergovernmental dispute on e-tolls and instead use the fuel levy to replace e-tolls and not bail out State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) Issued by Fred Nel, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Roads and Transport, 29 September 2019 Sanral e-toll collection down to R687.7 million – Fred Nel DA says this shows system must be scrapped Sanral e-toll collection down to R687.7 million, shows system must be scrapped 29 September 2019 The fact that the South African National Roads Agency (Sanral) has only managed to collect R687.7 million for the 2018/2019 financial year compared to the previous year when they were able to collect R1.87 billion once again shows that e-tolls are not working and should be scrapped. This information was revealed in Sanral’s integrated annual report, which also indicated that the entity raised an impairment of R10.04 bullion on its total e-toll trade. Motorists in Gauteng have refused to pay for e-tolls since it was implemented in 2013. It is high-time that a solution is found to e-tolls in Gauteng.eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-large-leaderboard-2','ezslot_6',117,'0','0'])); At the end of August, the National Minister of Transport was supposed to make an announcement regarding e-tolls but instead asked for extra time to consult with all stakeholders on the matter. A month has now passed, and we are still waiting to hear what the solution to e-tolls will be. The DA has been against the implementation of e-tolls as it is an unfair tax burden on our residents who are struggling to make ends meet. If no solution is found to e-tolls, then Sanral will see a further decrease in the collection of e-toll debt.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-leader-1','ezslot_7',118,'0','0'])); e-Tolls must be scrapped sooner rather than later. The DA will continue to put pressure on Premier David Makhura to lodge an intergovernmental dispute on e-tolls and instead use the fuel levy to replace e-tolls and not bail out State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) Issued by Fred Nel, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Roads and Transport, 29 September 2019