ANC condemns anti-foreigner violence and calls for Security Cluster to lead efforts to restore stability 9 September 2019 The National Officials of the African National Congress (ANC) met today, Monday 9 September 2019, to discuss the violence that has engulfed parts of the country over the last The Officials were insistent that all acts of violence be condemned including criminal acts directed at foreign nationals living in South Africa. The ANC is deeply concerned at what appears to be criminal elements sowing discord in several Gauteng communities by exploiting grievances around unemployment, crime, drugs and migration. The ANC commends the work done by the law enforcement agencies and security services to restore order and to arrest those involved in criminal acts. It calls on government's Justice, Peace and Security Cluster to establish the immediate causes of the violence and identify those involved in fuelling it. The ANC has also heeded the calls to listen to the genuine grievances that South Africans have which mav be giving rise to frustration and anger. The ANC calls upon government and social partners to accelerate efforts and work with greater impact to address the social and economic conditions of the South African people that fuel such acts of violence. These latest events underline the need for a government that is in touch with the people and responsive to their needs. All of us have a responsibility towards building safer communities and adherence to the rule of law is the duty of each one of us. No matter what grievances people may have, however, there can be no justification for the acts of arson, assault, looting and murder that have been committed against both South African and foreign nationals. The Officials have said that the attacks on foreign nationals run contrary to the cherished principle of pan-Africanism and solidarity with oppressed peoples. South Africa is signatory to a number of international conventions around migration and refugee protection, and many of the foreign nationals in our country have fled war and oppression in their countries. All citizens should be proud that South Africa — with its strong human rights culture, Constitution and refugee protection laws — continues to offer safety and refuge to oppressed men, women and children from many parts of the world. Every person in South Africa, whether they are citizens, residents or visitors, shares an equal responsibility to adhere to the laws of our country and our Constitution. Law enforcement agencies should act against any person breaking the law, regardless of their country of origin or nationality. The ANC calls on its members to play an active role in mobilising communities against violence, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance. It will work with communities and grassroots organisations to restore harmony and good relations to affected communities. Later this week the National Officials of the ANC will be out in communities across the country to give impetus to this call. At the same time, the National Officials expressed outrage at the growing incidents of femicide and called on law-enforcement agencies to impose tougher sentences, including life sentence, on those involved in such heinous crimes. The National Officials have urged legislators to immediately consider changing legislation to empower our courts to give appropriate sentences to perpetrators. Issued by Ace Magashule, Secretary General, ANC, 9 September 2019