MEC Fritz calls for greater intelligence gathering on truck petrol bombings 10 September 2019 The MEC of Community Safety, Albert Fritz, has condemned in the strongest terms the three petrol-bomb attacks on trucks along the N7 in the Western Cape earlier this morning and a fourth attack near Lwandle, Strand, on Monday night. MEC Fritz has called on the National Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, to ensure more effective coordination, intelligence gathering and sharing of information regarding these attacks. The three trucks were petrol-bombed in separate incidents, within minutes of each other. It is reported that the first truck was petrol-bombed and set alight near Moorreesburg. The second at the Porterville turn-off. The third near Piekenierskloof and the fourth attack was reported on Monday night near Strand. MEC Fritz said, “I call on Minister Cele to mobilise intelligence services, HAWKS and the SAPS, whilst working with law enforcement and Metro Police in an intergovernmental manner to facilitate intelligence gathering and sharing on these attacks. This is necessary to ensure more arrests, convictions and the prevention of further related crime.” “I will further ask the Provincial MEC of Transport and Public Works, Bonginkosi Madikizela, to request Provincial Traffic to increase their monitoring of highways and to work with SAPS. Ultimately, an attack on trucks and truck drivers is an attack on our economy in the Western Cape as it undermines our retail, construction and agricultural industries, to name a few”, said MEC Fritz. MEC Fritz further added, “I wish a swift recovery to the driver injured during these attacks. Together with my department, we will be closely monitoring the prevalence of truck attacks in the release of the annual crime statistics this coming Thursday by Minister Cele.” Under the leadership of MEC Fritz, the Department of Community Safety remains committed to using every tool at its disposal to safeguard the province. Issued by Cayla Ann Tomás Murray, Spokesperson for MEC Albert Fritz, 10 September 2019