Detective and vehicle shortages at Joburg East police stations 2 September 2019 Despite high crime figures, there are big shortages of detectives and vehicles at four police stations in east Johannesburg. These figures are revealed by Gauteng Community Safety MEC Faith Mazibuko in a written reply to my questions in the Gauteng Legislature. Jeppe police station has one of the highest murder rates in the country, but is short of 18 detectives and 11 vehicles. This station covers Jeppe, Bez Valley, Bertrams, Doornfontein and part of Kensington. As we have seen with the recent looting and burning of shops in Jeppestown, this is a volatile area that needs a strong police presence. Staff vacancies at the other police stations are as follows: Cleveland police station covers Cyrildene, Bruma, Dewetshof, and part of Malvern and Kensington, and is short of 2 detectives and 10 vehicles. Yeoville (covers Yeoville and Bellevue) - short of 4 detectives and 2 vehicles. Sandringham (covers Sandringham, Linksfield, Glenhazel and Fairmount) - short of 2 detectives and 2 vehicles. Two vehicles should be patrolling each sector round the clock, but this is not happening at any of the 13 sectors at these four stations. According to Mazibuko “due to shortage of resources, 2 vehicles cannot be posted at each Sector on 24 hour basis as required.” The total TRIO crimes (hijackings, house robbery and business robberies) at each station for 2017/2018 were as follows: Jeppe - 479 Cleveland - 324 Sandringham - 150 Yeoville - 180 I am very concerned by the staff and vehicle shortages and the lack of round-the-clock police patrols which are needed to bring down high crime rates. Detectives are totally overburdened, which is why arrests and convictions are very low compared to the volume of crimes. I have received complaints of a recent upsurge of crime in the area, and will push for staff and vehicle shortages to be filled as soon as possible. Issued by Jack Bloom, DA Joburg East Constituency Head, 2 September 2019