R144 million Joburg People’s Market expansion project starts 2 September 2019 Today, 2 September 2019, I had the pleasure of launching the start of the R144 million Joburg People’s Market expansion project which will see an additional 28 stalls added to the existing 71 as well as numerous facility upgrades that will assist entrepreneurial, and therefore, economic growth in Johannesburg. I was joined by the MMC for Economic Development, Cllr Leah Knott, and the Market’s CEO, Ayanda Kanana, as we held the ceremonial sod-turning of the upcoming developments, which is expected to create 262 jobs during and after construction. The People’s Market, which totals around R250 million annual purchasing, is an informal satellite market that forms part of the Joburg Market, the largest fresh produce market in South Africa and all of Africa by volume and value. By way of comparison, the Joburg Market is twice the size of the second ranked market in the country and bigger than 17 other local markets. The Joburg Market, measuring a total of 65 000m2, serves about 5 000 farmers from across South Africa who send their fresh produce to be traded to a larger buyer base, averaging about 10 000 daily. The People’s Market currently provides 71 informal traders with the opportunity to generate their own income, often allowing them to educate their children or to buy a house. After the upgrades are complete, an additional 28 stalls will be created.   Critical to the success of this project will be the development and incubation of entrepreneur development. There are a number of opportunities that will be created where the Market can facilitate the capacitation and up-skilling of a number of the tenants, apart from creating new business opportunities. Further upgrades to the Market include a new taxi rank, a new cold store and generator plant, and upgraded road, electrical, and water infrastructure. The upgrades to this critical component of the Joburg Market is a clear demonstration of this multi-party government’s commitment to bring Diphetogo to our residents, and especially our entrepreneurs and small business owners. This project will therefore also target women and youth when new stalls are allocated and when the entrepreneurship program is implemented. Our goal is clear; we want Johannesburg’s economy to grow by 5 per cent per year, thereby creating more much-need jobs, especially among the youth. These upgrades are a commitment from the City to support the growth of businesses through implementing and upgrading basic infrastructure. This is a goal this administration continues to be committed to. I would therefore like to thank the members of our coalition government, the IFP, ACDP, COPE, UDM and Freedom Front Plus for their continued support in bringing change to the residents of our City. I also wish to thank members of the EFF caucus, who vote with us on an issue by issue basis, for their efforts in helping to improve the lives of our residents. Issued by Chantelle Fourie-Shawe, Media Specialist: Office of the Executive Mayor, 2 September 2019