On the Radar: - Incubeta SA appoints MD- New GCEO for CWDi- Lwazi Media Ventures buys into Ebony+Ivory Features: EXCLUSIVE: Gallarelli off to TBWA\SAGallarelli resigns from Ogilvy SAby MarkLives. Luca Gallarelli has resigned after 17 years at Ogilvy South Africa. He will be replacing Sean Donovan as TBWA\South Africa group CEO, effective 1 December 2019. #BrandFocus: Moving people with Gautrain Management Agencyby Sabrina Forbes. “The Gautrain brand is a people’s brand," says Ingrid Jensen, Gautrain Management Agency executive manager of reputation. The Martini Shot: Copyright, performers' protection in questionby Bobby Amm. We must all urgently join the lobby to push back against legislation that, although well-intentioned, will ultimately do more harm than good. Gold for Africa at 2019 Cliosby MarkLives. South Africa is taking home one Gold, two Bronzes and four Shortlists, and Egypt two Silvers so far.Dear Radio: Exploring innovation in branded contentby Paulo Dias. It’s been a while since I explored innovations in audio and radio marketing and advertising, and this month the column takes us from Australia to London via the South African N3 highway. Regular Reads: Q5: Finding the human truth, with Zwelethu Radebe [interview]by Carey Finn. The award-winning local director talks about his arresting short film for SAB, Vuka, and balancing creativity with the constraints of commercial messaging. #BigQDiversity: Gender equity in SA advertisingby MarkLives. Advertising Week Africa (#AWAfrica) brings together industry professionals 28–31 Oct 2019 for thoughtful conversations with leaders from the marketing, advertising, technology & creative spaces. The MarkLives Big Q on the topic of workplace gender equity aims to help frame this discussion, and Nino Naidoo of Duke is the next key female executive to give us her assessment of the state of adland. African Echo: Zambia, our friendly meme nationby Mukandi Siame. When you type Zambian memes into a search engine, you soon realise that Zambia has become a gated community with many houses you could walk in. - SA TV Ratings: e.tv — primetime top 20 for Jul 2019 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify.biz headlines! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.