Ramaphosa remains silent while rumours circulate of constitutionally unfit Dlamini’s appointment as an Ambassador 17 September 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) notes with concern that President Cyril Ramaphosa has remained silent on former failed Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini’s rumoured appointment as an ambassador after the DA wrote to him on Friday last week to request clarity. This letter followed a recent Parliamentary Question and Answer session to the Security and Justice Cluster held on 4 September 2019, in which the DA posed a question to Hon Naledi Pandor, the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation: “Government seems to insinuate that ambassador positions are given or handed to guilty or faulty officials in the patronage system. Can the Minister confirm that Bathabile Dlamini is being considered by the President as an ambassador and which other ex-Minister’s applications are being considered? Thank you.” Pandor answered that the President, Cyril Ramaphosa, would announce a new ambassador at an appropriate time, as she did not appoint ambassadors. Pandor further stated: “But seeing that I’m smiling I’m sure you know why I’m smiling.” Since then, the DA has been reliably informed that there is an intention to appoint, amongst others, Bathabile Dlamini as an Ambassador in South Africa’s Foreign Service. The possible appointment of Dlamini as a Diplomat is cause for great concern and it appears as if such positions are reserved for politicians who are found guilty of misconduct during their term of service in high executive office. The Constitutional Court’s findings on Dlamini’s transgressions are momentous, with rulings indicating that her conduct was reckless and grossly negligent. An inquiry revealed that the Minister misled the Court to protect herself from the consequences of her behaviour. The position of Minister of Social Development she had occupied at the time demanded a commitment to ethical behaviour, with a high commitment to public service. Instead, she used her position as Minister to place herself between constitutionally enshrined rights and those entitled to them. Diplomats in the South African Foreign Service are required to advance South African interests and values, yet the Constitutional Court specifically found that Dlamini’s conduct flew in the face of the very values that underpin our Constitution. The DA believes that Ms Dlamini is not suited to hold the office of a diplomat and in light of the above, the appointment would constitute an irrational and unconstitutional decision. The DA once more requests that the President urgently provide us with confirmation that he will not appoint Bathabile Dlamini in any diplomatic position in the employ of the South African Foreign Service. Issued by Darren Bergman, DA Shadow Minister of International Relations and Cooperation, 17 September 2019