JCPS Cluster urges communities to work with law enforcement officials to fight crime 30 August 2019 After the incidents that were witnessed in Tshwane Central Business District (CBD) on the 28th August 2019, where a peaceful march by concerned citizens about the killing of the taxi driver turned violent, the Justice, Crime Prevention (JCPS) Cluster, encourages members of the community and law abiding citizens not to take the law into their hands but to work together with law enforcement officials to fight the culture of drug peddling that is rife in our communities. Community members should report all criminal activities to the nearest police station and they should join recognised Community Policing Forums. The Cluster is willing to partner with any sector that wishes to make a positive contribution to fighting crime. At the same time as the Cluster we want to send a strong message to the drug pedlars that drug peddling will not be tolerated in our society and it has no place to continue to thrive. Law enforcement officials will not hesitate to apply the full might of the law. Drug dealers have no place in our communities because they are killing the future of our young people. Furthermore, it is disappointing to receive reports that some of the law enforcement officials are alleged to be in cohort with the drug dealers. The law enforcement officials are expected to uphold the rule of law and ensure that our communities are safe.  We want to assure our communities that our investigating team is working day and night to root out all forms of corruption within the ranks of the law enforcement officials. Police officers are expected to display high morals and protect and serve our communities. Therefore, if any of the Police officers are found to be working with the drug pedlars they will be dealt with in the harshest manner as they are expected to live by the principles which are stated in the Constitution and the SAPS code of conduct which states that “members of the South African Police Service should perform their duties in an ethical, honest and responsible manner in all situations”. We call for calm as the investigators are working day and night to bring those who are suspected of shooting and killing of Mr Jabu Baloyi, a taxi driver operating in the Tshwane CBD. As the Cluster we want to send our deepest condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of the deceased person. All those responsible for this heinous crime will be brought to book and will face the full might of the law. Issued by Siphiwe Dlamini, Spokesperson for the JCPS Cluster, 30 August 2019