Gauteng dealings with Bosasa tripled under ANC-led Premier Makhura’s administration 24 April 2019 Today, I led a march against corruption to the Gauteng Premier’s office, where we left hundreds of bribery ‘brown envelopes’ at the doorstep of the Premier’s office. It is because there are too many ‘brown envelopes’ being passed around in Gauteng, buying peoples’ silence, bribing people to influence decisions about the awarding of tenders, and paying people off for their co-operation. Under the ANC-led Premier Makhura’s administration the provincial governments’ business dealings with BOSASA has increased by over 300% over the last 5 years from R108 million to R430 million under his predecessor Nomvula Mokanyana. In Gauteng R20 billion has been lost due to corruption, fruitless and wasteful expenditure. This money could have built 5 hospitals, 20 clinics, 30 schools and 77 000 houses. There is no one who has been held accountable for this corruption. Premier Makhura has continued on the same road of corruption and destruction as that of his predecessors. The likes of former Health MECs Qedani Mahlangu and Brian Hlongwana are still free without facing any consequences for the crimes they have committed against the people of Gauteng. Despite its incredible potential, Gauteng is being held back by corruption, mismanagement and maladministration by the ANC government. Corruption has stolen opportunities from our people and left them in despair. These monies could have been used to stimulate the local economy in the province, create investment opportunities for local businesses and grow employment opportunities. Gauteng should be the Golden Opportunity Province - a place alive with possibility, where people can realise their dreams in a thriving economy, where there is a job in every home, people feel safe and secure in their communities and where people should not despair about what tomorrow will bring for their children. It can no longer be business as usual and we cannot tolerate that those who have stolen from the public and betrayed their trust can walk away with no punishment. A DA government will do things differently; we will ensure that corruption is exposed and that those responsible are prosecuted and sent to jail. As the Premier, I will initiate a Provincial Commission of Inquiry into state capture for the province of Gauteng, so we can root out corruption at every level. I will fight for the establishment of an Independent Gauteng Civil Prosecuting Authority. The Independent Gauteng Civil Prosecuting Authority will be named Gauteng Scorpions. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Premier Candidate, 24 April 2019