R6,5 million electrification of Heavenly Valley Informal Settlement starts 23 April 2019 Today, 23 April 2019, I had the privilege to attend the sod-turning ceremony of the electrification of Heavenly Valley informal settlement in Klipspruit. To be able to restore dignity to the forgotten communities of the City of Johannesburg, like that of Heavenly Valley Informal Settlement, is exactly what this multiparty administration has set out to do. Even though I understand that this is not what our people deserve, the City is working hard to ensure all residents have access to basic infrastructure services like electricity and water. Electrification of these homes will not only mean less vandalism of current infrastructure or more visibility at night, it will also mean that the high school student studying for their exams will be able to do so under clear lighting. It means that people are now able to make less use of braziers and paraffin stoves, which can often be hazardous. This project by City Power is set for completion by end of June 2019 after which residents will have access to safe and reliable electricity for the first time. Throughout this project, two SMMEs and 20 local labourers will also benefit. As residents come from a low-income community they qualify for the City’s expanded social package (ESP) and qualify for a pre-set basket of limited free services, including electricity. I encourage residents to visit their nearest customer care centre to find out how much free basic electricity they qualify for and what process to follow in order to qualify for free basic electricity after they have been electrified. As a City, we continue to be committed to ensuring that the best interest of our residents are served, despite our many challenges. And we will continue to electrify informal settlements. This is why, in the medium-term term budget for 2019/20 passed by council last month, capital expenditure is directed towards addressing service delivery challenges and infrastructure backlogs such as electrification of informal settlements. R750 million will be set aside in the next budget for electrification projects across various informal settlements. I would also like to thank the members of our coalition government, the IFP, ACDP, COPE, UDM and Freedom Front Plus for their continued support in bringing change to the residents of our city. Though not a member of our coalition, my thanks also goes to the EFF, who votes with us on an issue by issue basis, for their efforts in helping to bring services to our residents. Issued by Chantelle Fourie-Shawe, Media Specialist, Office of the Executive Mayor, 23 April 2019