#PrisonNotParliament: 15 Years jailtime for corrupt ANC politicians implicated in VBS scandal 1 April 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West wants to see every person implicated in the VBS scandal to be investigated, tried and where found guilty, sent to jail. The suspension of the Municipal Manager of the Dr. Ruth Mompati Segomotsi District Municipality for his alleged involvement in the VBS heist is too little too late. The ANC should not fish for a scapegoat, but seriously act against all involved. ANC corruption and failed governance have now resulted in total chaos throughout the North West as service delivery has come to a halt, especially in municipalities where the corrupt ANC looted money through the VBS Bank Heist. The corrupt ANC continues to protect criminal cadres despite the overwhelming evidence against them. There is no new dawn under Cyril Ramaphosa’s ANC. The corrupt ANC has failed to take action against mayors, municipal managers or the chief financial officers of the municipalities implicated in the VBS heist. The DA has laid criminal charges against former Premier Supra Mahumapelo last year, following strong allegations that he abused his position to facilitate the investment of R314 million of the people’s money with VBS bank from the Madibeng, Moretele, Dr. Ruth Segomotsi Mompati, and Mahikeng municipalities in terms of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act and Section 6 of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act (POCA) at the Mmabatho Police Station. Reports indicate that the cash strapped Dr. Ruth Segomotsi Mompati District Municipality transferred R150 million to VBS last year, but only R101 million is reflected as having been invested by the Vryburg-based municipality. Today the Western Cape leads all the other provinces on every measurable criteria, from corruption-free government to education outcomes, and from healthcare and life expectancy to job creation and employment rates. The DA can bring good governance to the North West. Our plan for fixing North West details exactly how we will go about rectifying the wrongs of the ANC when in government. The time for change in North West has come. The DA will not deploy criminals to government unlike the ANC. We call on all people in North West to vote DA on 8 May and usher in a government that cares and delivers. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 1 April 2019