Santam gives hope to drought-stricken Sutherland community in collaboration with Agri SA 18 April 2019 Agri SA is sincerely grateful to Santam for its R300 000 donation to the Agri SA Drought Relief Fund. The ongoing drought in Sutherland in the Northern Cape has caused a devastating decline in the sheep breeding population and placed the town’s economy under tremendous strain. In light of this, leading South African insurer Santam has donated R300 000 to the Agri SA Drought Relief Fund which aims to provide relief to farmers, farm workers and the community of Sutherland. The lack of good rainfall since 2013 in the region has resulted in farmland boreholes drying up, making it harder to raise the sheep that are the backbone of the remote farming town. “Agri SA Drought Relief Fund aims to ensure that South African farmers can continue farming, that there is food security and that jobs are protected,” says John Lomberg, Head: Stakeholder Relations and Corporate Social Investment at Santam. “We fully support this organisation and encourage other organisations to join us in assisting drought-stricken farmers.” “It is heart-warming that South Africans and South African corporates are coming out in support of our sheep farmers during this very difficult time,” says Christo van der Rheede, Agri SA Deputy Executive Director. “Santam has long been a partner of Agri SA and we are delighted that they have stepped to offer farmers assistance.” Since its inception in 2015, Agri SA Drought Relief Fund, has been able to assist thousands of commercial and emerging farmers and their communities. Donations made in the past included feed, water, fuel, transport and financial aid. In addition, donations of more than R18 million have been received since 2015 which have provided farmers and communities with urgently needed assistance. In 2019 the communities of Tosca, Griekwastad, Mossel May, Kenhardt, Willowmore, Aberdeen, Paterson, Hoopstad, Fraserburg and Jansenville have received assistance. Agri SA is also working closely with Agri-North West, Gift of the Givers, Caring Daisies, Save the Sheep Sutherland, various farmer's associations and individuals to get much-needed relief to farmers and their workers. Issued by Christo van der Rheede, Agri SA Deputy Executive Director, Agri SA, 18 April 2019