IEC violated the law by registering BLF as a political party: FF Plus asks Electoral Court to intervene 23 April 2019 The Independent Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) is not willing to admit that it made a mistake by allowing the BLF to register as a political party and, thus, the FF Plus will ask the Electoral Court to instruct the IEC to correct this mistake. The Commission rejected the FF Plus's appeal against the chief electoral officer's decision to register the BLF. The FF Plus believes that the majority of South Africa's problems are caused by the sheer disregard for legislation. It is, therefore, important for the party to proceed with the matter seeing as the IEC cannot be allowed to violate legislation. It threatens South Africa's democracy and the upholding of law and order. According to the FF Plus, the merit of the case is strong seeing as the Electoral Commission Act prohibits the chief electoral officer to register a party that excludes people from joining the party based on race, ethnicity and skin colour. The BLF's constitution clearly states that only black people may join the party and the party also encourages violence. The BLF's constitution creates a breeding ground for racism and hate speech, as proven by the BLF's spokesperson, Lindsay Maasdorp, who welcomed the tragic deaths of the learners at Hoërskool Driehoek seeing as the learners were white. According to Section 16(1)(c) of the Electoral Commission Act (Act 51 of 1996), the IEC may not register a political party that does not allow membership of the party based on race, colour or ethnicity. The BLF's constitution stipulates in Section 4 that only black people my become members of the party. In Section 1, South African Constitution clearly stipulates that the South African state is founded on four core values and non-racialism is one of them. Thus, it is clear that the IEC made a mistake. The FF Plus asks that the court will rectify this mistake. The FF Plus will not give up the fight against the BLF's racism and racial polarisation. The IEC's disregard for South Africa's Constitution and the electoral legislation may not be tolerated. Issued by Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 23 April 2019