ANC Anarchists are burning down Gauteng while Mashaba and Mokgalapa work to serve the people 12 April 2019 It is as clear as day that ANC Anarchists are ready to burn down the country and criminalise communities in order to create the impression that well-run Democratic Alliance (DA) governments of Johannesburg and Tshwane are not working for the people. Just yesterday, Tshwane Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa delivered a State of the City Address, which re-committed the administration to putting the people first, especially the poor, who were ignored by the previous failed ANC administration. This ANC walked out of this meeting in order to return to their campaign of igniting the fires of anarchy. Furthermore, this morning Mayor Mokgalapa went to address the people of Gomorrah but ANC Anarchists prevented this from happening, thus leaving the community without answers. Last night, ANC Anarchists violently disrupted a community meeting addressed by Johannesburg Mayor Herman Mashaba; and this morning ANC Johannesburg Ward Councillors, who have been identified as the thugs fuelling the fires of anarchy in Alexandra, did not attend a scheduled meeting, which will lay the groundwork for next week’s City of Johannesburg service delivery and budgeting meeting with the people Alexandra. The ANC’s campaign of anarchy and thuggery, endorsed by Cyril Ramaphosa, will only see the people suffer. By contrast, DA leaders are putting the people and delivering services first. After Ramaphosa’s campaign in Alexandra yesterday, nothing has changed; with the only take away being lies and false hope. The law enforcement authorities cannot sit idly by while anarchists deployed by Luthuli House burn Gauteng to the ground and harass communities serviced by DA governments. Mayors Mashaba and Mokgalapa, as well as Midvaal Mayor Bongani Baloyi, will continue advancing the DA’s “people first” governance principle, while ANC Anarchists betray the people of Gauteng. Issued by John Moodey, DA Gauteng Provincial Leader, 12 April 2019