#AgencyFocus: Problem-solving before tech-building — Realm Digital by Sabrina Forbes. “They talk about that ‘founders’ energy’, where working until three o’clock in the morning is not the worst thing in the world. That founders’ energy carried us for about the first 10 years,” says Simon Bestbier, Realm Digital CEO. EXCLUSIVE: Van Rensburg new Avatar ECDby MarkLives. Avatar South Africa has appointed Sanche van Rensburg as executive creative director. Q5: The good, the bad & the ugly — Alice Rawsthorn on design [interview]by Carey Finn. The internationally-acclaimed design critic and author shares her thoughts on bad design — and integrity as a possible remedy. Only Connect Podcast: How CMOs can use data to be sense-makers [plus transcript]Only Connect: How CMOs can use data to be sense-makers by Bradley Elliott. Here is the first Only Connect Podcast and full transcript, in which Uber Eats SA GM Ailyssa Pretorius and I chat about why data is critical to sustaining competitive brand advantage. The Suit: What’s your problem?by Jason Harrison. If we're to pitch “the brief” as the starting point for leaps of genius instead, I believe there are three fundamental shifts required. By Invitation Only: The algorithm for maximising love and consumptionby Bokang Sibolla. By putting ourselves and our products on the market, we intrude on others’ valuable time and solicit their resources for our own gain. Dear Radio: Finding the next radio innovations by Paulo Dias. Where and how do we find the next radio innovations? Regular Reads: - Media Design: F*ck You, On The Grid, Riposte, The Guardian Weekly- SA TV Ratings: e.tv — primetime top 20 for Feb 2019 On the Radar: - Creative Circle: Jan & Feb 2019 winners- Accenture Interactive to acquire Droga5- #CampaignRadar: Where the best get better- Purchasing power of SA's female consumers to increase Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.