ANC disruption of Gangster State book launch akin to censorship 10 April 2019 The Democratic Alliance Youth (DAY) notes the disruption of Pieter-Louis Myburg’s Gangster State book launch today by individuals who identify as part of the ANC and ANC Youth League (ANCYL). ANC and ANCYL members reportedly stormed into the bookstore where the launch was held and proceeded to destroy copies of the book. The DAY condemns this violence in the strongest possible terms. Not only is this destruction of property deplorable but it is also akin to censorship. The ambush of this book launch is indictive of an ANC which has lost its way and of an organisation which is incapable of self-introspection and self-correction. The ANC, in an attempt to cling onto their dwindling grasp on power, has now resorted to chaos, thuggery and anarchy to hold onto its grip over government. The truth is that this book details the nature of the people President Cyril Ramaphosa is surrounded by. In particular, the book paints a damning picture of Ace Magahsule’s corruption and destruction of the Free State.From alleged assassinations, money laundering and racketeering; to manipulating a tender process on a housing project worth R150 million in favour of a company linked to his daughter; to using the Free State government as a piggybank – the ANC has remained silent on the alleged looting and criminality of its real boss, Ace Magashule. At the end of the day, no matter how much chaos and violence the ANC incites, the people of South Africa know that Ramaphosa is surrounded by criminals and thugs who belong in prison, not Parliament. The ANC will never speak out against this violence because they are the orchestrators thereof. This kind of thuggery does not belong in a democratic South Africa and it is for this very reason the ANC must be voted out of power come Election Day. Only the DA can Build One South Africa for All and jail corrupt politicians. Issued by Luyolo Mphithi, DA Youth Leader, 10 April 2019