Mbeki, like the DA, agrees that some in the ANC belong in #PrisonNotParliament 28 April 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has noted that former President Thabo Mbeki’s assertion that the ANC’s lists read like a police docket of ‘most wanted’ list of criminals, not a list of people who will represent the people of South Africa in an honourable manner. From Bathabile Dlamini who undermined a court of law and nearly collapsed the social security system, to Ace Magashule who stole from land reform beneficiaries and actively worked to build the Gupta empire, while collapsing the country. These cannot be people whose employment by the state and the people of South Africa can be justified. Jessie Duarte, Gwede Mantashe, Fikile Mbalula, Malusi Gigaba, Nomvula Mokonyane and David Mabuza are also among those who should swap their suits for prison overalls. South Africans who are hoping that Cyril Ramaphosa will be their saving grace, must understand that he belongs to an ANC that has become a ‘broad church’ of criminal syndicates. On 17 April 2019, to make this point clear, the DA delivered prison overalls and handcuffs, as well as the list of over 500 000 objections submitted by the people of South Africa who share the DA and former President Mbeki’s view that the ANC’s parliamentary lists do not inspire confidence. Those who believe that the ANC can be fixed by Ramaphosa only need to scan over their lists to show that the ANC is a criminal syndicate that cannot be rehabilitated. It is also for this reason that the DA Leader, Mmusi Maimane, wrote to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) Head, Adv. Shamila Batohi, to charge the ANC as a criminal syndicate. Their criminality is confirmed by their campaign of anarchy in communities across the country, especially Gauteng, which receive services from DA-led governments. It is clear that the DA message of change threatens the ANC. It is clear that more and more South Africans see that it is only the DA that is carrying through Tata Nelson Mandela’s vision of building One South Africa for All, where black, white, coloured and Indian South Africans live in harmony and prosper. Because, indeed, we are better together. On Wednesday, 8 May the people of South Africa, when casting their vote, should reflect on the last 25 years and many of the lost opportunities. Equally, voters must decide on the future that they want – more of the same or change that only the DA will deliver. Issued by Refiloe Ntsekhe, DA National Spokesperson, 28 April 2019