#ScrapEtollsNow: Government making criminals out of honest citizens 4 April 2019 Today I created a bonfire outside the South African National Road Agency’s ( Sanral) offices in Rooihuiskraal in Centurion with hundreds of Gauteng residents’ e-toll statements. The DA received these e-toll statements from overburdened Gauteng residents who cannot afford to pay for e-tolls. It is despicable that government is making criminals out of these hard-working, tax-paying citizens. A week ago, Sanral announced that they will no longer be issuing summonses to people who have defaulted on their e-tolls. But this reprieve was short lived - Finance Minister, Tito Mboweni then said that Sanral must review this decision. The decision by Sanral to no longer issue or pursue summonses to residents who have defaulted on their e-toll payments is an indication that this system is not working, has failed and should be scrapped immediately. The failing ANC government is constantly speaking with a forked tongue. Premier David Makhura, during his State of the Province Address (Sopa) last year he indicated the e-tolls system is not working and this year he barely touched on what will happen to the e-tolling system in the province. MEC Panyaza Lesufi last year boldly told residents of Gauteng that e-tolls would be gone by May yet the Minister of Finance is of the opinion that e-tolls must stay. It is high time that a firm decision is taken on e-tolls in Gauteng. Gauteng residents have been left in the dark and are confused about e-tolls. In our open letter written to President Cyril Ramaphosa we have asked him to give us a definitive answer on what will happen to e-tolls within 7 days. See full letter here. The DA is the only party that has been speaking out against the implementation of e-tolls since it was first implemented in 2013. When we take office after the elections in May, we will lodge an intergovernmental dispute to have e-tolls scrapped. Should this fail we will go to court to have the e-tolls contract cancelled. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Premier Candidate, 4 April 2019