Mashaba launches forensic investigation into Alexandra Renewal Project 9 April 2019 I have received confirmation from General Shadrack Sibiya this morning that he will be launching a full forensic investigation into the Alexandra Renewal Project (ARP). Information has been brought to the multi-party government’s attention that the ARP, which was launched in 2001, served as a slush fund for the ANC, the City of Johannesburg under previous governments and the Provincial Government. ANC members were employed to drive the ARP in Alexandra. From the information we have received, their task was to direct funding to ANC-aligned companies that under-delivered on housing and channelled money back to the ANC. There can be no question that the R16 billion set aside by National and Provincial Government for the ARP has been looted and used by the ANC as a tool for self-enrichment. This is precisely why the ANC, Premier Makhura and President Ramaphosa are so desperate to place the grievances of the people of Alexandra at the door of the City of Johannesburg. I place no stock in Premier Makhura’s announcement of an investigation in the ARP. He has served as the Premier of Gauteng since 2014, and has never once taken any interest in the matter until now. I have met with Premier Makhura and former MEC Mashatile on the issue of the Statement of Intent which was signed with great fanfare of the eve of the 2016 local government elections. I have asked where the funding is to come from for the massive promises made in that document. At no time did the Provincial Government take any interest in these matters. Our Group Forensics unit has a track record of credible investigations and will get to the bottom of the corruption that has robbed the residents of Alexandra of the much needed development in the area. It will include investigating the role of Provincial and National Government in the suspected looting, alongside that of the previous governments in Johannesburg. It is not surprising that there has been no focus on accountability for the current situation in Alexandra. The politically driven efforts to lay the blame at the feet of a multi-party government are a smokescreen to cover decades of failed promises and rampant looting. The real tragedy is that the legitimate grievances of the residents of Alexandra are not being heard. That is why I will engage the residents of Alexandra on 15 April 2019 to ensure our budget addresses the most pressing needs of this community. Issued by Luyanda Mfeka, Director: Mayoral Communications, 9 April 2019