DA to refer ANC to IEC over spreading false information about the party in Muslim communities 24 April 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) will refer various screenshots of WhatsApp messages from the ANC’s WC election group disseminating disinformation about the DA with the intention of affecting the outcomes of elections in Muslim communities to the IEC. These graphics spreading fake news are disgusting and untrue. They also are in violation of Section 89(2) of the Electoral Act  which clearly states that no person may publish any false information with the intention of - (a) creating hostility or fear in order to influence the conduct or outcome of an election; or (b) influencing the outcome or conduct of an election. Should the ANC be responsible for this reprehensible material, it would be clear that they so fearful of the DA’s growth that they are resorting to a smear campaign, using the same undemocratic tactics that they used in Alexandra and other areas where they incited violence and destroyed public property to make these areas ungovernable. As such, we therefore call for the electoral commission to take urgent and immediate steps to urgently determine the origin of this material. The IEC can no longer remain silent while other parties continue to be in breach of the Electoral code by spreading false, inaccurate or misleading information about the DA - designed to intentionally cause harm and unduly affect the outcome of the election. It is clear that the DA is the only party that is committed to building One South Africa for All. We represent all South Africans in our ranks irrespective of religion or creed - that is why we find the depictions in these screenshots distasteful and repugnant.  Only a morally bankrupt party, which is devoid of any new ideas will use the genuine concerns of the Muslim community for its narrow political ambitions. It is time for the people of South Africa to vote for a DA government which genuinely cares about interests of all South Africans. Issued by Mike Moriarty, DA Principal Representative of the Party Liaison Committee on the IEC, 24 April 2019