Bullying tactics by person behind Duarte’s number and email address worrying 3 April 2019 It was with great relief last week, that the public was informed that the ANC Deputy Secretary General, Ms Jessie Duarte’s communications devices were hacked, and that messages and emails received from her should be ignored. I had been amongst those who had received strange emails and SMSes from Ms Duarte’s number and email address in recent times. What worried me, however, is that similar messages, supposedly from Ms Duarte’s devices, were received well before the announcement of the hacking on 28 March 2019. I have received messaging – varying from aggressive to respectful – purportedly from Ms Duarte in February 2019, and in the latter part of 2018. As early as 2015, emails from Ms Duarte’s address were written to me and to Mr Kathrada taking issue with the fact that the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation, where I serve as Executive Director, had invited the ANC to a dialogue that included several other political parties. Ms Duarte felt the ANC should not be sharing a platform with “right wing organisations and anarchists” and also felt affronted that the dialogue series could be called ‘Lost in Transformation?’ – which she construed to be an attack on the ANC, indicating that it reflected the narrative of certain opposition parties. What’s troubling, is that I am not the only person to whom similarly disturbing messages have been sent over time. I know of other individuals, and Whatsapp groups, that received concerning messages purportedly from Ms Duarte’ number. One hopes that the ANC can clarify whether or not Ms Duarte’s devices and accounts were being tampered with before this latest incident, or, are previous messages that were sent truly reflective of the type of character that holds of the title of Deputy Secretary General of the oldest liberation movement in Africa? In an email on 28 February 2019, someone purporting to be Ms Duarte, launched into a tirade claiming that I had supposedly denied a request that she be allowed to address the Kathrada Foundation’s Board to “explain some of the things you think I am guilty of”. At no time was I even aware of such a request, neither did the Kathrada Foundation ever accuse Ms Duarte of being guilty of anything. The person criticises former Minister of Public Enterprises, Barbara Hogan – also a Board member of the Foundation – for her comments before the Zondo Commission, and indicates that this will be challenged before the Commission itself – something which Ms Duarte, or anyone else, is free to do. This email was followed by a short exchange of messages on 28 March 2019, which marked the 2nd death anniversary of Kathrada’s passing. The person behind the message insists that I have called her – ‘Ms Duarte’ - corrupt – which is untrue. Upon me asking for proof of this assertion, the person hints at taking up the matter legally. Following this incident, after being unable to reach Ms Duarte telephonically, I called another individual, who is mentioned in the exchange, to express that I would not tolerate such bullying, with a request that this be conveyed to Ms Duarte. The next strange message forwarded to me was written in Ms Duarte’s name, but was not directly from her number. This message viciously attacks Barbara Hogan and Cheryl Carolus in almost the same vein as the statement from the ANC Women’s League following comments that the two stalwarts had made at the Kathrada death anniversary event. This statement labels me the “the master behind the intrigue, an ANC elder, the CEO of the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation”. It states, “He was the one who came to tell the ANC that Jacob Zuma was not welcome at the Kathrada funeral. Kathrada was a good man, he was in bad company. His legacy is now mired in the anger that the two women have for anyone they don’t like.” Now it is true that I conveyed Mr Kathrada’s wishes and that of his family to Ms Duarte and Mr Mantashe at the time of Mr Kathrada’s passing, and they did not challenge it at all. They instead undertook to inform then President Zuma of the matter. The reference to being an ANC elder is also not correct, but this is no fault of Ms Duarte’s. I agreed to support the recent statement from some ANC stalwarts who incorrectly assumed that I was still a member of the ANC. I was an activist in the United Democratic Front and the Transvaal Indian Congress in the 1980s and became active in the underground of the ANC from 1986 onwards. I also became a fulltime organiser for the ANC from 1990 to 1995 and managed the ANC’s Gauteng election campaigns in 1995 and 1999, as well as assisted in the 2004 campaign. It was Ms Duarte to whom I owe part of my political awakening as she was responsible for sending me on a three-month student exchange programme to Milan in 1981 when she worked for the American Field Service programme. I hope that the various messages over time, purportedly from her, are indeed the result of the hacking of her devices, as they appear to be from someone with deep seated issues and a desire for recognition. If not, it would be rather unfortunate if someone of Ms Duarte’s seniority within the anti-apartheid movement were to be employing such tactics. By Neeshan Balton * Note: Neeshan Balton is the Executive Director of the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation but writes in his personal capacity. Record of several messages/ emails from Ms Duarte’s devices, or from person/s purporting to be her: Whatsapp message sent out in Ms Duarte’s name – 29 March 2019 The mind boggling statement by Cheryl Carolus is perhaps indicative of her erratic political behavior over several years. In 1994 Carolus berated the people going to parliament to serve the country of getting onto the Gravy Train. A short while later she owned the gravy train, having been given yes given shares in a BEE deal which saw the 4 richest women in South Africa apportioning shares to themselves, causing an outcry by Numsa. The agile and wealthy Carolus gets an empowerment deal which sees her take 26% share in de Beers Diamonds with some of her cronies. Our Cheryl is not shy to shine. This is all other people’s money, She is the Chair of Goldfields, she served on the Investec Board. Her life is an interesting array of javelin throwing. She was the Deputy Secretary General of the ANC, then High Commissioner to the UK, then led Tourism SA, then Chair of SAA. Now chief town crier for the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation and disrespects the constitutional rights of others by proclaiming that “innocent until proven guilty is just rubbish” . Where does this rich persons venom for others come from. Surely the ANC over empowered her and it has gone to her head. She was moaner in chief against Jacob Zuma, now her target seems to be two women whose struggle credentials far outshine her maverick and populist UDF days. It is no suppose that she would again use the death of an icon to launch her attacks on others. Now its his unveiling that brings the other venomous former ANC member out in a rash. Barbara Hogan lives well, how she finances her good life is of course no thanks to the generosity of the many people who supported Ahmed Kathrada. A furniture mogul in Laudium , amongst others. Of course AMabhungane is not keen to dig into the underwear of these two ladies, too much dirty laundry there. But here is the thing, Carolus says she is cleaning up for Cyril Ramaphosa. Well then we have the storytelling all wrong. See Cyril Ramaphosa met Nomvula Mokonyane just a week ago and agreed that the rule of law was important. In other words she must tell her side of the story. Maybe he forgot to tell Cheryl this. But CC and Hogan dear girls forget to mention that the Bosasa saga also implicates Cyril Ramaphosa and Gwede Mantashe, presumably also tsotsi elements now. But then there is the master behind the intrigue, an ANC elder the CEO of the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation, Neeshan Bolton. He was the one who came to tell the ANC that Jacob Zuma was not welcome at the Kathrada funeral. Kathrada was a good man, he was in bad company. His legacy is now mired in the anger that the two women have for anyone they don’t like. Haaibo CC money cannot buy you decency you are as rotten as selfish as they come. SMSes received and responded to by myself on the 28 March 2019 (blue writing from Ms Duarte’s number) Dear Mr Bolton I Respectfully request you to provide facts on the apparent knowledge you have regarding acts of corruption I have committed. I also respectfully request that you provide evidence of when and under what circumstances you assert that I am corrupt. Yours Sincerely Jessie Duarte. (5.17pm) And when did I say you were corrupt.. (5.18pm) I am being respectful now. I think you best keep this civil. I am ready to give you and the AKF benifit of the doubt but I have an affidavit from a person who claims so. I have rights and will exercise them after the elections. In fairness I am giving you time to recollect your own comments. Sincerely Jessie Duarte. I cannot talk now I am about to start a meeting. (5.23 pm) Please feel free to use the affidavit as you see fit ...I don't need time to check my memory bank as I have not made any such utterance. There is also nothing uncivil about me asking you to provide proof of when and where such statements were made. (5.38pm) Thank you. (5.50pm) Dear William, I am attaching the response from Mr Bolton. His is the affidavit in he is also described as an ANC elder. I have attached a copy of the Affidavit. I think we must proceed. I will also discuss with Krish in the morning. I am on the campaign trail in Western Cape hopefully back on Tuesday. (5.54pm) Email received purportedly from Ms Duarte – February 2019 Jessie Duarte Dear Sir,I am writing this letter in your care to the trustees of the AKF.An AKF member has brought to my attention that members have asked that your organization invite me to a meeting to ask me to explain some of the things you think I am guilty of .The request was denied.I find it ominous that the AKF, a trust which carries the name of a legend in our history has become synonymous with denying justice and making crude and untested allegations. Ms Hogan, an influential member of your trust in her submission to the Zondo commission declared that I was corrupt. Ms Hogan does not remember that I was not the DSG of the ANC in 2008 . It would therefore not have been possible for me to serve on the deployment committee. In September 2010 I was in hospital at the time Ms Hogan had her altercation with Gwede Mantashe and I was not present . This too she has forgotten. In fact its easy to check I was at the clinic in Bedforview The Dr who treated me was Dr Percy Miller. I only resumed duties in the ANC in March 2011. Of course I am aware of the circumstances of this famous altercation because it is common knowledge in the ANC that Ms Hogan presented the case to employ a CEO of Transnet and the committee made an alternate suggestion of a Black male, she did not agree. The rest is history. I am totally unaware of her many assertions regarding her conversations with former President Zuma or any other person. Yes I supported the idea of an alternative to the Independent, the Citizen the Business Day. I found the TNA well established in 2008 and the ANN7 too. I was not unhappy that a new media which would give our movement unmitigated media coverage was launched. In fact I was told that the name New Age was a name sponsored by the officials of the ANC. I was not an official until December 2012. My relationship with Moegsien Williams is decades old. He was the first journalist who developed community newspapers and I learned from him the value thereof. I am still a friend of his. I met the Gupta brothers a few times, almost always at Luthuli house with other ANC officials and twice I was invited to their home to have dinner with Anand Sharma from the Indian National Congress. No brown envelopes no bribes just conversation . The AKF is quick to cast aspersions . Justice is not a slogan it is a real choice we make.In fact on both occasions Dr. Randera and Coco Cachalia and her husband, George were also guests. I am accountable to the people of South Africa for my choices and yes I have made mistakes, I am not a perfect person. But, judging me is not your right without hearing an alternative view. When Cde Ahmed Kathrada had something to say to someone he called and said it . I witnessed countless occasions when he asked for explanations from Madiba, from Cde Kgalema and he also asked for explanations from former President Jacob Zuma. He had integrity that was unassailable. Sadly his legacy is lost. I respectfully request that the members of your trust a) do not discuss me in your meetings or privatelyOrb) invite me to meet the trust to speak for myself. Comrade Ahmed Kathrada was a great man. I and others were treated abominably at his funeral and even as we tried to show our respects to his family.I was treated like a dog with rabies at the funeral of Cde Lalu Chiba, a comrade , a friend and someone I spoke to often.There is none amongst your trustees whom I feel any association with. I am going to the Zondo Commission , I will raise my concerns there about what Ms Hogan said .Yasmin Jessie DuarteCc President Ramaphosa Response to February 2019 email by myself Neeshan Balton Dear Ms Duarte Thank you for email . For the record there has never been any discussion in the AKF ( that I am aware off) on inviting you to a meeting to seek clarity on the issue you raise. We would not want to duplicate the purpose of the Zondo Commission which we think is the best place for the issues you mention to be discussed. Should you however think that such a meeting would be of value the Foundation will most certainly consider it. I will not comment on all the other allegations made in the email as i don't want engage on them via this platform. Best regards