DA warns KZN’s senior citizens as SASSA scammers strike again 15 April 2019 Pensioners in KwaZulu-Natal - already the soft targets of increased criminal activity - have been dealt yet another severe blow as SASSA (South African Social Security Agency) ‘scammers’ hit the province yet again. The situation comes after the recent migration from the former SASSA card to the new South African Post Office (SAPO) card, with many pensioners believing that this would bring an end to fraudulent deductions from their accounts. Regrettably, this has not been the case and the DA is aware of several elderly citizens who have had their entire SASSA pensions withdrawn by criminals, leaving them without a cent to survive the month. To add to this, cards are also being cloned with the result that funds are withdrawn before recipients even get to pay points. This is despicable. Equally disturbing is the fact that SASSA remains mum on the issue while also dragging its heels in terms of investigations, with the result that some elderly citizens have not been able to access their pensions for as long as six months. This is simply unacceptable and the DA expects KZN Social Development MEC, Weziwe Thusi to intervene without delay and ensure that these probes are fast-tracked. Currently, all recipients who were victims of fraudulent withdrawals are requested by SASSA to provide a sworn affidavit, a copy of the SAPO card and South African Identity document. All documents to be handed over to SASSA office for an investigation. In the interim, the DA encourages the elderly to avoid becoming targets by not divulging any personal information, particularly over the phone. SASSA would not call you to update your information. The ongoing delays within SASSA are symptomatic of an ANC-led Social Development Department led by an MEC, led by a failed ANC government which does not care. On 8 May, the people of KZN will have the opportunity to choose a government which puts the people first and which does not abandon some of the most vulnerable members of society. That government is the Democratic Alliance. Issued by Sharon Hoosen, DA KZN Spokesperson on Social Development, 15 April 2019