Failing ANC government uses false title deed promises to mobilise for party rally 15 January 2019 The DA has come into possession of a letter signed by Mr NB Thabathe, HOD of Corporate Services at Ray Nkonyeni Municipality, inviting Marburg residents to come collect their housing title deeds. The date, venue and time is the same as ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa's rally at the school. Residents were even advised that municipal transport will be provided to the event. Click here to see the flyer and here for the letter. Most shocking is that during and after the event no title deeds were handed over to any residents. The residents left empty handed. Many of these residents have been waiting for their title deeds since 1994. This abuse of municipal resources for party campaigning shows that the failing ANC doesn't care about the community, it only cares about itself. The ANC recognises its dwindling support in Marburg and had to resort to empty promises to fill a rally hall. The Democratic Alliance strongly condemns the misuse of the people's money for ANC campaigning purposes. The residents of Ray Nkonyeni Municipality suffer from high unemployment and poverty levels, lack of housing and basic service delivery. Yet this Ramaphosa-led ANC is willing to waste their money on rallies. This is a blatant indication that Ramaphosa's ANC is no different to Zuma's ANC. The bus drivers have changed but it is still the same broken and corrupt bus. This is also an indication that in KZN Ramaphosa can only get the public to attend his events by lying about services which his ANC has failed to deliver. The DA will be raising this matter within Council and will call for accountability and for heads to roll. Primarily we want answers as to why the HOD of Corporate Services got the municipality involved in what was clearly a political event. If necessary, we will escalate this matter to the Public Protector to investigate this misuse of the people's money. Only the DA can bring change that accelerates the delivery of quality services and puts the people first. Only the DA can build One South Africa for All. Issued by Rishigen Viranna, DA Ugu Constituency Head, 15 January 2019