City libraries unlock doors to learning 11 January 2019 The City of Cape Town’s libraries offer learners and students safe spaces to study, research and learn, and at the same time, they have access to unique resources to aid learning. Learners and students at the Brown's Farm Library in Philippi were encouraged to study diligently when the Executive Mayor of Cape Town, Dan Plato, and the Mayoral Committee Member for Community Services and Health, Councillor Zahid Badroodien, paid the facility a visit at the start of the academic year. 'This week sees many thousands of grade one learners enter through the school gates for the first time. I want to make sure they know about the amazing services that are available to them at our libraries, and that they use the libraries to improve their knowledge and get good grades. In 12 years’ time I want to see these learners, who I see here today, walk through the gates of a university or a college and continue on their journey towards securing a better future for themselves,' said Mayor Plato. The City’s libraries complement the work done at schools and tertiary institutions, and for many young people, it’s the only quiet or safe space to study. 'We have 104 libraries in Cape Town and I want to encourage parents and older brothers and sisters to please support our children in making use of them,' added Mayor Plato. 'Libraries provide free access to educational materials and resources to many who would otherwise be unable to afford them,’ said Councillor Badroodien. Libraries offer learners a place where they can focus and complete the learning process. ‘For many learners, the situation in their homes or neighbourhood are not conducive to study and they may experience challenges such as access to online study material. There are areas where the library is not only the safest space, but also the one place where it is quiet enough to allow for study and knowledge retention,’ added Councillor Badroodien. Students have online access to Encyclopaedia Britannica and PressReader which includes access to the latest research and information as well as the world's best magazines and newspapers. All registered library users can access these E-resources through any internet-enabled mobile, smart phone device and through the City's SmartCape initiative. ‘This means learners and students have access to factually sound information, updated on a regular basis, which will be available to them at any time of day. Content on the site is tailored according to the educational level of the user and the service also supports those with English as a second or third language,’ said Councillor Badroodien. This service is another effort by the City to provide digital access to educational and other resources. City libraries also offer the Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC) which is available remotely via the internet and can also be accessed inside the library. A single search returns results from the entire collection, including different formats of material such as books, CDs, magazines, etc. and shows material availability across the libraries in the City. Library patrons can also view and renew items on loan to them. To find your library and its opening times, click here. Issued by Greg Wagner, Spokesperson to the Executive Mayor, Dan Plato, 11 January 2019