#Bosasagate: DA’s legal team approaches President Ramaphosa for independent audit on all ANC government contracts with Bosasa Former Bosasa COO, Angelo Agrizzi’s testimony before the Zondo Commission shattered the myth that corruption in the ANC was simply a feature of Jacob Zuma and the Gupta family. A system of corruption that builds a wall between insiders and outsiders - the “haves” and the “have nots” is in the very DNA of the ANC. It should come as no surprise that the awarding of ANC government contracts to Bosasa is tainted with allegations of bribery, corruption and fraud. Many of these contracts remain active. In this light, the DA’s legal team has written to President Ramaphosa, to immediately: Instruct Cabinet to audit individual government departments’ contracts and deals with the state; Instruct functionaries to investigate the contracts’ legitimacy and terminate the contracts and/or approach the Court to set aside these agreements where necessary; Direct the SAPS/Hawks to investigate the allegations with the requisite professionalism; and Ensure that internal disciplinary action against all implicated ANC members are instituted with immediate effect. We have requested that the President respond with these undertakings by no later than 29 January 2019 as this matter is urgent. Criminal charges should be brought against CEO Gavin Watson with haste. In answer to my Question in Parliament on 6 November 2018, the President assured me that he: ‘… asked him [Andile Ramaphosa] at close range whether this money was obtained illegally, unlawfully – and he said this was a service that was provided. To this end he actually even showed me a contract he signed with Bosasa. The contract also deals with issues of integrity, issues of anticorruption, and all that. On this one, I have made sure that I get as much information that I can. He is running a clean and honest business as an advisory as he has been trained as a consultant with his business science qualification…’ Agrizzi’s testimony that Bosasa dispensed dirty money to the ANC for electioneering in the North West and Western Cape, that R3 million was shared between Lindi Gouws and the President’s son, Andile Ramaphosa, who banked R500 000, and that payments were made mostly in monthly installments indicates that the President may have lied to Parliament. The Public Protector is currently investigating this following my complaint lodged last year. The President cannot continue to sit on his hands, being selective on investigating corruption.  Swift action is required. If the President will not act, the electorate have the opportunity to punish the ANC government at the polls in the coming months. A DA government will bring change that builds One South Africa for All. Bosasagate offenders will be first in line and find themselves behind bars for 15 years in prisons that Bosasa and ANC government facilities management still hold the keys to. Statement issued by Mmusi Maimane, Leader of the Democratic Alliance, 20 January 2019