Only change led by the DA can stop failing ANC’s corruption 15 January 2019 I want emphasize that this is not some random act or some sensationalist publicity stunt. The DA wants to highlight a very crucial point, that the ANC and corruption are bedfellows. Not only is the vile act of corruption illegal, it is also one of the most immoral and selfish acts because it steals from the people, especially those oppressed by poverty and unemployment. Corruption’s victims are mothers who can’t feed their children. Corruption’s victims are the elderly who have been on the housing waiting list since 1994. Corruption’s victims are young people who cannot find work. It is for this reason that we have placed stopping corruption as a key election offer. Billions of rands meant for development often ends up in the pockets of uncaring and corrupt ANC officials, who have put themselves before the people’s needs. Well, as the DA we are committed to stopping this practice. Under a DA-led government, those found to be corrupt will face 15-years in prison. The ANC may have a new president and a new slogan, but it is still the same political party that it was under former provincial chairperson and convicted criminal, John Block. It’s also the same political party that was captured under the close watch and assistance of former President Jacob Zuma. The ANC is the same bus just with a different driver, and that bus is headed in the wrong direction; leaving the people to fend for themselves. But that’s not the whole story. The direction in which the country is headed can be changed, and we can build One South Africa for All. The power to bring change is in the hands of all voters who can either vote for empty promises of corruption or vote for real change under a DA-led government. There are too many people within the failing ANC and the administration of the ANC government, that have gotten their hands dirty. Just like the red sand of the Northern Cape, this dirt leaves a stain that will not come clean, no matter how much Ramaphoria you pour on it. In other words, the liars and looters have gone nowhere. The looting of state resources has also not stopped, and will never stop under the leadership of the failing ANC. In fact, as the ANC fights its own demons, and faces the very real threat of being pushed out of the governing seat of this country, and this province, the party becomes more and more desperate to retain power at all costs. In effect, the looting of the state continues to escalate. It escalates to ensure an evergreen slush fund that the ANC can use to buy votes. It also escalates so that the connected elite can fill up their personal coffers because they know that their time to make a living off money intended to improve health care, to fight crime and to stimulate the economy, is quickly coming to an end. So much so, that the elite are becoming violent as they frantically try and cover up their tracks so that they can continue plundering scarce state resources. In fact, this is what has brought us here today. DA MPL, Boitumelo Babuseng, who has time and again fearlessly spoken out on corruption, recently found himself at the brunt of an assault by an elitist cadre with clear links to the ANC. Shortly after Christmas, on 29 December 2018, Babuseng was assaulted, in the presence of his wife and child, outside a local supermarket in Kimberley after buying braaivleis for the family. The assailant, Benton Sithebe, accused him of “posting nonsense on Facebook” and proceeded to slap him in the face. Sithebe then told Babuseng to go ahead and lay charges against him. This is in response to Babuseng previously posting on social media that the looters of the Northern Cape Youth Chamber of Commerce and Industries (NCYCCI) should be held accountable for misappropriating funds. Sithebe is a so-called “businessman” and secretary of the NCYCCI. Together with other NCYCCI members, he has been accused of misappropriating at least R1,8 million intended to stimulate business amongst the youth. The DA is in possession of a voice recording whereby Sithebe admits that his “business” was the sole business to benefit from the funds allocated by the Department of Economic Development and Tourism. Sithebe, who is heard begging the department for more funds for an induction for members, further goes on to imply that additional funds for the NYCCI would ensure the ANC a victory in 2019. After the incident, Babuseng received a threat on Facebook from Sithebe’s friend, Fona Modiragale, who posted on Facebook: “Babuseng vat gat. We are taking this to the streets now. Makunyiwe”. The DA does not take this threat lightly. This is a call to violence and possibly even murder. Babuseng has opened a case against Sithebe and also applied for an interdict on 31 December 2018 against both Sithebe and Modiragle. The matter has been sat down for 1 February 2019. This is not the first assault on Babuseng for speaking out against corruption. In April last year, Babuseng was assaulted by Bongani Sibisi, Somandla Sibisi and Collin Bosman. Collin Bosman was involved in the controversial Flamingo Park horse racing event, for which the DA laid criminal charges with the Hawks. The Sibisi’s meanwhile were involved in the contentious Diamonds and Dorings Festival, which the DA reported to the Public Protector due to a number of irregularities.  The two Sibisi’s happen to be friends of Sithebe and Modiragle, and are also friends of the ANC. Their modus operandi is all the same: you highlight corruption that they are involved in and they assault you. We must stop and ask ourselves, why does the ANC not act against such blatant corruption? The answer is simple. The failing ANC is no more intent on fighting corruption now, than it was pre-Ramaphosa. There is too much at stake for the ANC. Staying in power is everything to them. Tackling corruption, that implicates countless ANC elites, will do little to unify the ANC at this vote-tipping point in time. And so it is that the ANC will not and cannot tackle corruption. The ANC therefore can’t take this country anywhere but down. Under their leadership, more and more funds will be wasted on corruption and less and less money will be available for critical services and grants. In contrast, only the DA can build One South Africa For All. The DA doesn’t shy away from exposing and dealing with corruption and we don’t place the corrupt on pedestals, growing their power at the cost of growing South Africa. That is why the DA will proceed to lay criminal charges against Sithebe as well as some of his NCYCCI associates, including Kgosi Mooketsi, Thato Motsemme, Jerome Pienaar and Edward Matiwane and Shaun Smit. We will also lay charges against Mr Darryl Christians, from the Department of Economic Development, who has heard Sithebe’s admission of guilt regarding the misappropriation of R1,8 million, but has failed to take any action against him, as well as Kuberin Packirisamy, the CFO, who authorised the payment to the NCYCCI. The DA will also follow up on the assault cases opened by Babuseng, as it is critical that these are speedily investigated by the authorities. The DA will to campaign across the Northern Cape and South Africa in order to earn our people’s trust and work with communities to build One South Africa for All where there is fair access to real, long-term jobs; there is an honest and professional police service that restores order and keeps communities safe; the delivery of quality services is accelerated; and our country’s borders are secure. Issued by John Steenhuisen, DA Team One South Africa Spokesperson on Crime, 15 January 2019