Giyani Water Project: DA to lay culpable homicide charges against failing ANC government 14 January 2019 This week the DA will lay charges of culpable homicide against the MEC for Cooperate Governance, Jerry Ndou and the former Minister of Water and Sanitation, Nomvula Mokonyane, following the tragic death of 6 year-old Nsuku Mhlongo who fell in a trench that was left open at the abandoned Giyani water project. The incomplete Giyani water project is a perfect example of the failing ANC’s government inability to execute its service delivery mandate due to financial mismanagement and alleged corruption. The R3 billion project that was supposed to provide water to 55 villages in the area came to a halt when the Department of Water and Sanitation under former Minister Mokonyane failed to make payments to contractors. Now this incomplete ANC-government failure has directly led to an innocent child losing his life. The ANC is killing our people! The DA calls on MEC Ndou to urgently ascertain if the company currently responsible for the project, Khato Civils, should be conducting further business with government. The company was appointed by the Department of Water and Sanitation to continue work on the incomplete project after it was abandoned. The DA believes that this is not an isolated matter as the uncaring ANC continues to prove that they are neglecting the safety of our residents. In November 2018, a 18 month old toddler also fell into an unused borehole and died in Joppe village near Letsitele. In September 2018, Mogalakwena resident, Mr Daniel Pitja also sustained serious spinal and neck injuries after falling into one of the uncovered manholes that is two metres deep that was also left by a contractor. During our oversight inspection within the municipality , we have discovered that there are 15 uncovered holes around Mahwelereng and Mokopane which pose risks to the residents in general. The DA urges MEC Ndou to ensure that all the trenches and unused manholes excavated during these projects are closed to save the lives of our residents playing and walking in the streets on a daily basis. A DA-led government will prioritise the safety of our people and communities to enable us to build One South Africa for All. Issued by Jacques Smalle, DA Limpopo Premier Candidate, 14 January 2019