Two statements: COSATU calls on Mine Bosses and relevant state institutions to intervene to stop the spectre of violence in the mining sector The Congress of South African Trade Unions is calling on the National Commissioner of the SAPS, The Premier of Gauteng and the MEC for Safety to intervene to stop the anarchy and the bloodshed at Blybank in Carletonville, where NUM members are attacked by the AMCU aligned vigilantes. The reports that houses and cars are being torched and workers are being harassed and attacked are deeply worrying. The events at Blybank follow the thuggery that we saw at Beatrix Mine in the Free State where many workers were attacked and injured by AMCU aligned thugs. It is shocking that law enforcement agencies are failing to stop AMCU from operating like a medieval militia that coerces and intimidates people into submission. The use of violence against innocent workers has been a feature in the mining sector since AMCU emerged as a roleplayer in the mining sector. The indifference and overall incompetence of responsible authorities to stop this anarchy and barbarism is evidence of a dearth of leadership in the state. A fragile but strategic sector of the economy is being decimated by greed, incompetence; thuggery and poor leadership. We call on the mining companies and law enforcement agencies to take action against the spectre of violence that continues to haunt the mining sector. The mine bosses also need to acknowledge and confront the fact that they are primarily responsible for fostering discord and violence in many workplaces in the sector. The undeniable fact is that it is their quest for super profits that has created orphans and cost many workers their lives. Statement issued by COSATU, 8 January 2019 *** NUM concerned about its member's houses and cars that were burnt down at Blybank in Carletonville. The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM)  strongly condemns the escalation of systematic attacks on its members by alleged AMCU hooligans who are exploiting the strike situation with acts of crime and barbarism at Blybank in Carletonville. There are 15 houses and 6 cars that have been burnt since the AMCU strike started last year. All 15 houses that were burnt belongs to NUM members. The NUM is concerned that NUM members houses are being burnt down every day. It is also disturbing that NUM members are  also being forced to join AMCU by thugs carrying spears. We want the company and the law enforcement agencies to take action against these thugs who have decided to target our members for reporting on duty. This intimidation against members of the NUM has been happening for some time now and our members have reached a stage where they cannot tolerate it anymore. Statement issued by Livhuwani Mammburu: NUM National Spokesperson, 8 January 2019