Limpopo Home Affairs and Border Posts neglected and porous The Democratic Alliance (DA) inspected the Stockpoort and Groblers Bridge borderposts as well as Lephalale, Polokwane and Mokopane Home Affairs offices. The visit confirmed the failing ANC government’s dismal inability to secure our country’s porous borders. Please click here for a soundbite by DA Team One SA Spokesperson for Immigration, Jacques Julius. According to the DA Team One SA Spokesperson for Immigration, Jacques Julius the inspections revealed the stressful work environment Home Affairs, border post and South African National Defence Force (SANDF) officials work under as all noted a lack of resources such as identity cards, uniforms and equipment as hinderances to perform their duties. "Grobler’s Bridge border post only has 3 computers out of 6 that are in working order and are outdated. There are no scanners at the border which means that packages go through unchecked and the acute staff shortage poses a risk during periods where the border in inundated with a large influx of visitors". "The roads along the border post fence at Grobler’s Bridge are mostly inaccessible which makes it difficult for the SANDF to patrol the entire border fence. Officials indicated that a large number of immigrants are caught with fraudulent South African documents and people with fraudulent documents cross into nearby towns to collect social grant payments and access healthcare services" said Julius. At the Lephalale Home Affairs office, immigration officials detailed how they have gone six years without uniforms and identity cards despite numerous requests. They noted insufficient transport to visit border posts, incapacity to deal with asylum seekers and only one person working on the movement control system used to verify status of immigrants as their biggest challenges. According to Julius the Stockpoort border post has no record of undesirable people making it virtually impossible from keeping them from re-entering the country. There is also no border fence, only an agricultural fence and the border post is largely secured by the Limpopo river where people cross illegally when water levels drop. "This inspection showed clear evidence of the extent of the neglect of the Home Affairs offices and border posts in Limpopo, despite it having some of the country’s busiest borders" said julius. "The failing ANC government’s inaction and inability to secure our porous borders has caused low morale amongst border officials, put our country at the risk of allowing criminals and undocumented immigrants into the country and jeopardises border security. There is a need for more staff and resources like equipment and vehicles in order to ensure these border posts can deal with the numerous challenges they are faced with. The DA will sufficiently resource border posts to ensure border security and restore integrity in the immigration system to ensure a safe and prosperous One South Africa for all." Please click here and here to download pictures. Statement issued by Jacques Julius, DA Team One South Africa Spokesperson on Immigration 8 January 2019