ANC manifesto glosses over corruption and state capture The ANC is not serious about tackling corruption head-on – and their manifesto is proof thereof. Yesterday, surrounded by the architect of State Capture and his loyal henchmen, Cyril Ramaphosa, presented the ANC’s manifesto for the 2019 Elections. The manifesto promises to “put an end to state capture, restore the integrity of public institutions and tackle corruption”. While these promises are all good and well, it is evident that the ANC chooses to gloss over its role in corruption which has had a devasting effect on the provision of services to our people. The governing party is soft on corruption as is evident in their manifesto. Unlike the DA, they have no clear plan on how government should handle corruption as their only concern is to retain power and continue with their looting. The ANC is incapable of self-correcting and promoting integrity in government, because they are the very people who erode good governance and destroy institutions. The DA is the only party that has a track record of clean governance. We have a no-tolerance approach to corruption and under a DA government, anyone found guilty of corruption will be sentenced to 15 years in jail. The DA’s plan to fight corruption is simple: Establishing an independent unit dedicated to identifying, fighting and prosecuting corruption. Ensuring the payment of all public money is transparent. Bringing in direct elections for all political office holders so that the South African people can hold their president, premiers and mayors directly accountable. Implementing regular lifestyle audits for all politicians and government officials. Protecting and encouraging ‘whistleblowers’ who identify and report on corrupt activities. Whilst the ANC celebrates the corrupt, the DA works to put them behind bars. The people of South Africa deserve a government which provides services and keeps them safe, not one which robs them of their futures. Statement issued by Phumzile Van Damme MP, DA Spokesperson on Corruption, 13 January 2019