Nomvula Mokonyane did not declare Bosasa gifts in Gauteng Legislature 23 January 2019 Environmental Affairs Minister Nomvula Mokonyane declared none of the Bosasa gifts and money when she was a MEC and Premier in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. I have checked the Register of Members Interests for the period 2002 to 2016 when she allegedly received R50 000 a month from Bosasa, as claimed by Angelo Agrizzi at the Zondo Commission into state capture. He also said that she got Christmas groceries for many years, including 120 cases of cold drink, 40 cases of beer, 4 cases of quality whisky, 12 cases of frozen chicken, 200kg of beef braai packs, eight lambs, and 8 cases of premium brandy. None of this is declared in the Register, which merely records that she has 10 000 shares in Telkom and two houses, one in Kagiso and one in Noordheuwel, Krugersdorp. According to Agrizzi, he also paid for renovations to one of her homes, as well as a car for her daughter and funerals for her relatives. It appears that Mokonyane blatantly lied every year in the Legislature by not declaring these gifts as required by the Executive Members Ethics Act. If Agrizzi’s evidence is true, she got a whopping R8.4 million in total for the 14 years that she was allegedly paid R50 000 a month to provide protection for Bosasa because of her close connection to Jacob Zuma. It is significant that Mokonyane has complained about due process issues and not outrightly denied receiving gifts from Bosasa. She is utterly shameless so she is unlikely to resign as did former Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene when evidence was uncovered about his meetings with the Gupta brothers. There are many other corruption controversies she has weathered in her political life. I agree with comedian Chester Missing that Mama Action has now become Mama Transaction. The DA has laid criminal charges against her and there is no “new dawn” if she is not swiftly removed from office and as a candidate in the elections. Issued by Jack Bloom, DA Member, Gauteng Legislature, 23 January 2019