Davenport joins Havas SA as CCO by MarkLives. John Davenport has joined Havas South Africa as its new chief creative officer. By Invitation Only: Tips from the trenches of advertising by John Davenport. Extreme advertising 101. Here’s some advice from someone who’s been in advertising a while. Media Design: Top 5 international mag covers 2018by Shane de Lange. Many points from my last two columns — 2018 in review and Top 5 South African covers of 2018 — are mirrored in this week’s selection of the best international covers of 2018. Inside Look: Studio Warburton’s Agency Leaders 2017 poster designby MarkLives. Hylton and Chantelle Warburton of Studio Warburton, the designers of the 2017 Agency Leaders' Most Admired posters, give us a quick lowdown on the creation process. Gestalt: Customers — key to unlocking an exciting new time in marketingby Leeya Hendricks. It’s an exciting time to be in marketing, with various other disciplines enabling this area of the business, influencing its future direction and enhancing its impact. #BigQ2019: Digital means adland must adopt disruptor’s mindsetby Prakash Patel. My expectations for 2019 centre on transformation — transformation of our industry, our skills, our approach, our consumers, our services and, of course, digital transformation. - Infobesity & visual tsunamis — Boniswa Pezisa- The myth of being time poor — Lani Carstens- What do decreasing brand budgets mean for adland? — Brenda Khumalo- Is advertising screwed? — Jarred Cinman On the Radar African Bank appoints agencyLocal creatives help clean up their 'hoodindaHash now in Nigeria Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.