DA welcomes Labour Court judgement on Laerskool Schweizer-Reneke, now we need to rebuild a fractured community Note to editors: Please click here for an Afrikaans soundbite and here for an English soundbite by the North West Premier Candidate, Joe McGluwa MP. The DA in the North West welcomes the judgement of the Labour Court in the matter of Elana Barkuizen that she be immediately reinstated. It has been a painful and difficult two weeks for all parties involved, most especially for the children affected, who have had to endure such trauma, and for Elana Barkhuizen. When the issue first arose, the DA went to Laerskool Schweizer-Reneke on a constructive fact finding mission to establish the facts of the matter, not to prejudge, but rather give real expression to our belief in building one South Africa for all. We held extensive engagements with the principal and the chairperson of the School Governing Body. We believed at all times that due process had to be followed, and that the rights of all involved were to be protected and upheld and that there needed to be a swift and just resolution of the matter. The ANC and EFF in contrast sought to irresponsibly inflame racial tension and created an environment which such distress and threats to the safety of the children and of Ms Barkhuizen. North West Education MEC, Sello Lehari, and his department through their actions clearly compromised due process, for what can only be assume for reasons of political expedience. The DA is now looking forward to teaching activity resuming at the school and the safety of the learners being the number one priority. Now is the time for the community in Schweizer-Reneke to find one another again and reconcile. We must all learn from this experience and work toward reconciliation. The DA reiterates it’s call on South Africans to remain vigilant in guarding against political populist rhetoric, especially in this election year, that seeks to divide people on the basis of race. The DA will continue in its efforts to bring people from all walks of life together, united in our diversity to build One South Africa for All. Statement issued by Joe McGluwa MP, DA North West Premier Candidate, 24 January 2019