Failing ANC’s empty promises leaves Sebokeng residents at flooding risk for over a decade Note to Editors: Find attached a voiceclip from DA Gauteng Premier Candidate, Solly Msimanga The residents of Sebokeng, Emfuleni that were left devastated by the torrential rain in December, have been asking the failing ANC to fulfill their service delivery obligations by attending to stormwater drain issues since 2008. This was the cry of residents whose homes have been badly damaged, during my oversight inspection of and engagement with residents. The municipality had previously admitted that shoddy work by contractors who were building roads in the area and left debris and foreign objects in storm-water channels may have contributed to the flooding of homes resulting in the damage of 70 homes and 13 families being left homeless. However, flooding has been an ongoing problem in the area for over a decade. Last year it was revealed that this failing ANC-led municipality lost R872 million through fraud and corruption. My concern is that this bankrupt municipality, that has no money to collect refuse, pay arrear water and electricity bills or fix streets, does not have the money to continue delivering any services to its residents, this includes ensuring that residents are protected from possible flooding. The repair work that was recently completed on the storm drains was simply a patch job with no real maintenance done to ensure this does not happen again. In June last year, Gauteng Premier David Makhura announced a detailed plan to rescue the embattled Emfuleni municipality, following the decision to place the municipality under administration Emfuleni because of its inability to provide adequate service delivery and due to allegations of maladministration. However, it is clear that this plan has had little impact on the lives of residents who still live in fear of heavy rains battering the area. It is simply more empty promises from the failing ANC government. The failing ANC has been given too many second chances. Only the DA can build One South Africa for All by speeding up the delivery of quality services to all of Gauteng’s residents. You can download the pictures here and here. Statement issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Premier Candidate, 7 January 2019