#Bosasagate: DA to report ANC election payments to IEC The Democratic Alliance will be submitting a complaint to the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) following more jaw-dropping revelations at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into State Capture. Former Bosasa COO, Angelo Agrizzi, today revealed under oath that senior ANC officials requested cash from the company to be used for election campaigning. Agrizzi testified that he had attended a meeting in Rustenburg where he met with the MEC for Social Development from the ANC-run North West province. It was at this meeting that the request for money was made. Agrizzi testified that the request for money was motivated by the elections. If Bosasa contributed laundered money to the ANC’s election campaign, the company must also be reported to the South African Police Service (SAPS) for violating section 3 of the Prevention and Combatting of Corrupt Activities Act, sections 4 and 6 of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act, as well as sections 29 and 30 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act. The DA will be laying criminal complaints against the company the moment the Zondo Commission releases the transcripts of today’s testimony. Our complaints to the IEC and SAPS will supplement our Public Protector complaint against Cyril Ramaphosa, lodged after it was revealed that he lied to the National Assembly about a R500,000 contribution to his campaign to become ANC president by Africa Global Operations, formerly Bosasa. Responding to a question from DA Leader Mmusi Maimane on 23 November 2018, Ramaphosa assured South Africa that the payment to his son, Andile, was above board and related to a service contract he had seen with his own eyes. Days later Ramaphosa revealed that the payment had nothing to do with this contract but rather related to a contribution by Bosasa CEO, Gavin Watson, to his election campaign. It is essential that the IEC, SAPS and Public Protector prioritise these investigations as the allegations point to the subversion of our elections and is an assault on our very Constitutional democracy. Indeed, we repeat our call on Ramaphosa to immediately initiate an independent inquiry into Bosasa corruption. The Watsons are the new Guptas; the Ramaphosas are no different to the Zumas; and the ANC of today is no different to the ANC of yesterday. Only one party can bring the change South Africa needs. Rooting out corruption is a crucial part of building One South Africa For All. Statement issued by Natasha Mazzone MP, DA Team One SA Spokesperson on State Capture, 18 January 2019