Schweizer-Reneke teacher’s case to be heard tomorrow Trade union Solidarity’s urgent application to set aside with immediate effect the unlawful suspension of Laerskool Schweizer-Reneke teacher Elana Barkhuizen, will be heard in the Johannesburg Labour Court tomorrow. According to Solidarity Chief Executive Dr Dirk Hermann, the trade union is arguing that the suspension was unlawful and that Barkhuizen is a victim of political opportunism. Education MEC Sello Lehari indicated that he would oppose the court application. The school’s governing body will not oppose the application and indicated that it would abide by the ruling. At the time of issuing this invitation, the MEC has not yet served his opposing papers. Anton van der Bijl, Solidarity’s head of Labour Law Services, points out that Barkhuizen’s suspension was not within the ambit of labour law. "Lehari acted way outside his powers by publically announcing her suspension as his decision,” Van der Bijl said. Members of the media are cordially invited to attend the court proceedings. The Labour Court has granted permission for proceedings to be filmed and media representatives are encouraged to take their seats half an hour before the time. Date: Thursday 24 January 2019 Time: 10:00 At: The Labour Court, Arbour Square Building, on the corner of Juta and Melle Streets, Braamfontein Update: MEC withdraws his opposing of the urgent application in the Schweizer matter North-West Education MEC, Sello Lehari, advised Solidarity late this afternoon that he decided to withdraw his opposing of the urgent court application Solidarity had brought to have Elana Barkhuizen’s suspension set aside. Court proceedings will continue as planned tomorrow because the court must still rule on the legality of the suspension. In his statement, Lehari also indicated that he would abide by the ruling. Elana Barkhuizen will attend tomorrow’s court proceedings. To read the MEC's complete notice, click here. Statements issued by Solidarity, 23 January 2019