#Bosasagate: DA seeks answers about North West ANC’s dodgy election funding 21 January 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the North West Provincial Legislature today submitted written questions to all provincial government departments, to get answers on shocking allegations, revealed at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into State Capture, on Bosasa corruption in the Provincial government. Former Bosasa COO, Angelo Agrizzi, revealed under oath that senior ANC officials requested cash from the company to be used for election campaigning. Agrizzi specifically testified that he had attended a meeting in Rustenburg where he met with the MEC for Social Development of North West and it was at this meeting where the request for money was made. Agrizzi clearly testified that the request for money was motivated by the elections. We demand answers on these allegations and the ANC in North West should account for their role in allegedly laundering public money for party political purposes. We want specific answers on how the people’s money was apparently abused to promote the ANC and win elections. Our questions want information on: 1. Since the 2010/11 financial year to the latest date for which information is available for, detail all contracts the Department has into with Bosasa specifically with regards to (a) contract value per line item, (b) service and/or product delivered, (c) total actual payments made under each respective contract’; 2. For each specific contract, (a) when and where was the invitation to tender published, (c) the closing date, (d) the date the bid adjudication committee sat, (e) the names and positions of all members of the bid adjudication committee; 3. For each specific contract, (a) the number of bids received, (b) the names of bidding companies and/or consortiums, (c) the bid value; 4. For each specific contract, (a) the bid adjudication committee’s shortlist, (b) the record of decision in motivating the awarding of the contract to Bosasa? The DA remains the only party that can bring the change that South Africa needs. Rooting out corruption is a crucial part of building One South Africa For All. We must always stand up to corruption that steal opportunities away from ordinary South Africans. Those found guilty of corruption under a DA government will be investigated, prosecuted, and will serve a minimum sentence of 15 years behind bars. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 21 January 2019