#Bosasagata: President Ramaphosa must cancel all existing contracts with Bosasa, institute inquiry 17 January 2019 Yesterday, at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into State Capture, former Bosasa COO Angelo Agrizzi revealed under oath that Bosasa (now African Global) spent between R4 and R6 million per month - often hand delivered in cash bags  – to bribe ANC officials. These bribes were to ensure the company scored lucrative tenders and contracts with government, to the tune of over R10 billion. Agrizzi’s testimony shone a new light on how totally corrupt the ANC government is, and how this corruption spreads far wider than just the Guptas and Jacob Zuma. The relationship between Bosasa and the ANC illustrates how South Africa has been turned into a klepto-state by the ANC. Given this truly explosive testimony, I call on President Cyril Ramaphosa to instruct his government to immediately cancel all contracts and tenders with Bosasa, and place a strict moratorium on any new contracts with the company or any of its subsidiaries. It is also becoming increasingly difficult for the President to avoid the DA’s earlier calls for an independent inquiry into Bosasa, covering the corrupt company’s full relationship with the ANC and the state - including the relationship between the President’s family and Bosasa. This inquiry should be set up immediately. Furthermore, I have asked President Ramaphosa when he will be paying back the R 500 000 “donation” received  from Bosasa CEO, Gavin Watson, towards his “CR17” campaign to become ANC President. Ramaphosa cannot play both sides. He cannot condemn state capture and set up inquiries into other ANC corruption, but avoid the same inquiries when the corruption involves him. The fact is that Ramaphosa received a R500 000 “donation” from a company that has been paying the ANC bribes since 1999. He can no longer mislead the public into believing that ‘he did not know.’ He is also on the record as having told Parliament that his son, Andile Ramaphosa, does lucrative paid work for Bosasa. All of this appears no different to every other Bosasa bribe to the ANC since 1999. Bribery is corruption, and this is the very antithesis of bringing change that builds One South Africa For All.  We must always stand up to corruption that steals opportunity away from ordinary South Africans. Issued by Mmusi Maimane, Leader of the Democratic Alliance, 17 January 2019