Statement, 31 January 2019 SACP condemns killings and attacks on Party members and Samwu leaders in the Province of Limpopo, calls on all relevant law enforcement agencies to intensify efforts to hunt down and bring the perpetrators to book to the full might of the rule of law The South African Communist Party strongly condemns the murder of, and attacks on comrades in the Province of Limpopo, expresses its sincere condolences to the families of the deceased and wishes the comrades who survived the attacks a speedy recovery. The SACP calls on all relevant law enforcement agencies to intensify their work to hunt down the perpetrators and bring them to book to the full extent of the rule law. The SACP strongly believes that these murders and attacks are a barbaric reaction to the resolute activism of its members and leaders of the South African Municipal Workers Union (Samwu) widely known to be outspoken against the looting of the liquidated VBS Mutual Bank. No amount of violence will stop the SACP, the Party has declared, and the union as well as other progressive formations from pursuing the campaign for all those who benefited illegally from VBS Mutual Bank to be held to account to the full might of the rule of law. The SACP will continue and deepen its efforts to forge a widest possible patriotic front and a popular Left front to advance and defend the interests of our people, the majority of whom is the working class and poor. The following comrades were shot dead or survived the attacks. Comrade Ronald Mani, Samwu Limpopo Provincial Deputy Secretary, shop steward in the Vhembe District Municipality and member of the SACP was shot dead last night, Wednesday 30 January 2019. Comrade Timmy Musetho, member of the SACP District Executive Committee in Alphues Malivha District in Vhembe District Municipality, Samwu shop steward in the municipality and former Limpopo Provincial Chairperson of the union, was also shot at and luckily survived. He is however still fighting for his life in hospital in Polokwane following the attack, which occurred on Thursday, 24 January 2019. There was an attack recently at the home of Comrade Patrick Aphane, Samwu Limpopo Provincial Secretary and member of the SACP District Executive Committee in Sparks Ramagoma District, Sekhukhune District Municipality. Fortunately he was not at home during the attack. Comrade Maupa Thabang, councillor in the Fetakgomo-Tubatse Local Municipality, Sekhukhune District Municipality, was recently murdered. The SACP is deeply concerned about the fact that there has been no single arrest since all of these murders and attacks took place. Statement issued by Goodman Mitileni, SACP Limpopo Provincial Secretary, 31 January 2019