Investigate Major-General Vearey for allegedly lying 14 January 2019 Minister of Community Safety, Alan Winde, says that the Major-General Jeremy Vearey should immediately be investigated for what appears to be a blatant lie on an affidavit about a telephone conversation with a journalist who wished to obtain a sensitive affidavit. It is alleged that Major-General Vearey, who is the Head of Detectives in the Western Cape, denied the phone call, and in turn, reported the journalist to the Press Ombudsman for lying in an attempt to smear his name. Upon the publication of the recorded conversation, Vearey immediately withdrew the complaint against the journalist. In late December, Lieutenant-Colonel Charl Kinnear wrote and handed in an affidavit requesting an urgent investigation into certain members of crime intelligence in the Western Cape, and their co-conspirators, based on a claim that they are misusing state property and resources as part of a smear campaign against, amongst others, Major-General Vearey. Minister Winde said: “This type of behaviour from a senior member of the police is completely unacceptable. If it is proven to be true, Mr Vearey must do the honourable thing and step down, as he has brought the service into disrepute. We cannot have persons of questionable character in SAPS, much less, heading up a division. It is further disturbing that this is not the first time that Mr Vearey has demonstrated this type of behavior, as he has previously been the subject of a scandal which has exposed his dubious nature.” In 2015, he violated the SAPS Act by openly expressing his political affiliation. In this case, he was actively promoting his political links, which led to a public spat between himself and another officer on social media. He was also allegedly at the heart of then Mayor Helen Zille’s unscrupulous arrest in 2007, when she was in Mitchell’s Plain fighting for the release of an anti-drug campaign leader. Minister Winde said: “On the basis of these concerns, and in accordance with the duty and responsibility assigned to my office by section 206 of the South African Constitution, I have lodged a formal complaint with the Head of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate, and requested an investigation into the conduct of Major-General Jeremy Vearey. In addition to this, due to the evidence at hand, I have also requested the national Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, to institute the immediate suspension of Major-General Vearey while we await the outcome of this investigation.” The residents of the Western Cape need and deserve a police service that they can trust, and which will serve and protect them without fear or favour. Said Winde: “It is my firm belief that the SAPS head office in Pretoria has proved incapable of managing its officers. Around the world, police are managed at regional level to ensure the greatest amount of accountability. That is why I am taking up the fight on behalf of Western Cape residents, to give provincial government the mandate for policing.” Issued by Marcellino Martin, Spokesperson, Minister Alan Winde, 14 January 2019