It’s a good day to be Khoi-San, says Faiez Jacobs 10 January 2019 It’s a good day to be Khoi-San. That is how Western Cape ANC secretary Faiez Jacobs expressed his immense joy at the National Council of Province’s passage of the Traditional Khoi-San Leadership Bill at a special plenary today. (THURSDAY, JANUARY 10 2019) The DA opposed the Bill, which was passed by the National Assembly in 2017, which will now be sent to President Cyril Ramaphosa to be signed into law. Jacobs said: “We are overjoyed at being recognized as indigenous people and are grateful to the ANC. It’s a good day to be Khoi-San. Yes, amid the joy we remember the pain, suffering and genocide of our people. But today is a time to celebrate.” Jacobs slammed the DA for opposed the passage of the Bill. “By opposing the Bill the DA displayed its opposition to the Khoi-San people getting a House of Traditional Leaders. They are anti-Khoi-San. We call on the President to sign this Bill into law as soon as possible so that the Western Cape will have to create a provincial House of Traditional leaders for the Khoi-San,” Jacobs said. The Bill passed today provides for the recognition of traditional and Khoi-San communities, leadership positions; acknowledgment of traditional and Khoi-San communities, leadership positions and for the withdrawal of such recognition. The legislation also caters for the recognition, establishment, functions, roles and administration of kingship or queenship councils, principal traditional councils, traditional councils, Khoi-San councils and traditional sub-councils, as well as the support for such councils; and also for the establishment, composition and functioning of the National House of Traditional and Khoi-San leaders. The Bill also makes provision for the establishment of Provincial Houses of Traditional and Khoi-San leaders;  establishment and composition of local houses of traditional and Khoi-San leaders; as well as for the establishment and operation of a Commission on Khoi-San Matters. Because of the passage of the Bil the National House of Traditional Leaders Act of 2009 and the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act of 2003 were repealed, while amendments will also have to be made to other laws. Issued by Faiez Jacobs, ANC Western Cape secretary, 10 January 2019