ANC STATEMENT ON LIST PROCESS 6 January 2019 The African National Congress held its National List Conference as part of an extended National Executive Committee Meeting in Durban on Friday, 4 January 2019.  This is a culmination of a process that started with branch nominations from October 2018 and followed by Provincial List Conferences. There is no doubt that the ANC’s list process is the most comprehensive and transparent in South Africa’s political terrain, guided by a set of guidelines that ensure internal democracy. The guidelines ensure that the core values of the ANC are reflected in the calibre of people who get nominated to become the ANC’s public representatives in Parliament and Provincial Legislatures.  These include 50% representation of women, 20% representation of people under the age of 40 with a goal of increasing this to 30% over time. The National List Conference looked at the broad guidelines to ensure that the non-racial character of the ANC, gender parity and generational mix find practical expression in the list of its public representatives.  The conference was emphatic that in instances where the adopted principles and guidelines are not met, it will not hesitate to intervene. The Conference affirmed that the ANC list of public representatives must meet the following core principles: a) Candidates must be electable in terms of the guidelines b) Candidates must enhance the integrity of the ANC In addition, the list guidelines provide that, candidates must meet the following criteria: a) Must be an ANC member in good standing with a proven track record of commitment to, and involvement in the democratic movement b) Must have Experience, education or expertise that will enable them to make a constructive contribution in the relevant legislature or in parliament c) Must have no criminal record after 1996 that resulted in a sentence of 12 months or more without the option of a fine (this excludes political-related crimes committed before April 1994) d) Must have no history of ill-discipline or corruption e) Must have no history of involvement in fostering divisions and conflict f) Must have no other breaches of the ANC code of conduct In ordering the list the Conference will ensure that the following process has been adhered to: a) The top 25% voted for in the Provincial list conference will automatically go in safe places to ensure that those with the most support from the democratic process are not excluded. b) The top 150% of names for the number of seats [if 100 names are needed, this means the 150 names that received most support] are then used for a shortlist that will be used to order the lists based on the criteria. c) The 150% list will also ensure that we have sufficient reserves d) The list committee may use interviews and other procedures to help with the ordering of the list. e) On all ordered lists, every second name must be a woman and at least every third name a person with specialised expertise. At least 40-50% of all names must be former or sitting MPs or MPLs, or councillors. The list will then be subjected to a vetting process for the NEC to satisfy itself that all candidates on the list can withstand scrutiny and meet all the requirements. The ANC is under no illusion that its list must enhance its integrity with a caliber of public representatives that are capable of advancing the electoral mandate of the ANC. The NEC noted the overall integrity of the process and expressed gratitude to all the structures involved.  It further noted the report of the Appeals Committee.  While acknowledging that there were some weaknesses in the process, we must draw lessons for the future. The extended NEC agreed that various consultative processes will be undertaken to meet the objectives that both structures had identified in strengthening all the lists.  These criteria encompass the principles of the ANC such as non-racialism, non-sexism, generational mix, integrity, political acumen and expertise. The NEC affirmed that this Conference marks a major milestone in the finalisation of the ANC’s list process.  As elaborated in the list guidelines, the Constitution of the ANC and other relevant documents, a variety of vetting processes will be undertaken, including verification of relevant documents, checking of criminal records as well as matters pertaining to the integrity as enshrined in both the ANC Constitution. These processes will determine the final lists that the ANC will submit to the IEC at the appropriate time. The recently-released Ispsos poll, predicting a 61% election outcome reflects an improving voter sentiment in favour of the ANC.  While we welcome the outcomes of this survey, we remain mindful of our commitment to the voters to continue on a path towards the realization of our ideal of a better life for all South Africans.  This process is a firm undertaking of our seriousness to ensure that those who represent the ANC in public office are men and women who can withstand scrutiny. Issued by Ace Magashule, ANC Secretary-General, 6 January 2019