Media Statement on MEC Panyaza Lesufi’s visit to President High School The Gauteng Department of Education visited President High School this morning, 25 January 2019, to establish facts regarding the disturbing viral video depicting learners in a violent confrontation. On the video, one learner is seen beating the other until he falls, hitting his head on the ground. MEC Lesufi met with the Principal, Mr Andre Ferreirra, who indicated that it was an isolated incident following an altercation between the learners. The preliminary report indicates that the altercation started when the perpertrator threw a ball towards a Grade 8 learner, which was seen by the victim, who then confronted the perpetrator regarding the incident. MEC Lesufi cautioned against jumping into conclusion prior to the disciplinary hearing, as it would provide more details about what transpired. He also expressed concern about learners fighting, surrounded by a crowd and no one tries to intervene to stop the incident, as this sends out a very bad message. The learners caught fighting on video have been suspended and will appear before a disciplinary process on 31 January 2019. The disciplinary process will provide more details regarding what transpired, as the learners will have an opportunity to express their side of the story. MEC Lesufi welcomed the decision of the school to deploy additional educators during breaktime. “This is one of our top performing schools, with 98% matric pass rate. Hence we were concerned when news of such an incident surfaced. We welcome the decision of the school to increase the number of eductors who will monitor the learners during break time, from 4 educators to 10. The department will not tolerate any form of racism or bullying in our schools. We have a reponsibility to protect every learner,” said MEC Lesufi. The psycho-social unit has dispatched a team to the school to provide counselling to both the learners who were involved in the incident. The department will continue to monitor the situation. Statement issued by Gauteng Department of Education’s Spokesperson, Steve Mabona, 25 January 2019