DA to lay charges against Nomvula Mokonyane and ANC for electioneering with the proceeds of crime 22 January 2019 The DA today laid criminal charges against the Minister of Environmental Affairs and head of the ANC’s 2016 election campaign, Nomvula Mokonyane, for accepting bribes from Bosasa. Testimony from former Bosasa COO, Angelo Agrizzi, at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into State Capture detailed how the company, now called Africa Global Operations, made monthly cash payments of R50,000 to Mokonyane, starting in 2002, as well as catering private Christmas parties, organising family funerals and renting luxury vehicles for her daughter. Importantly, Agrizzi detailed how Bosasa provided catering services to the ANC’s Siyanqoba rallies ahead of the Local Government Election in 2016 when Mokonyane served as the party’s head of elections. Last week Agrizzi detailed similar contributions of laundered money to the ANC’s election campaign in North West. With his testimony, Agrizzi paints a startling picture of a governing party that has no hesitation to campaign and contest elections using the proceeds of crime. Mokonyane famously said that the ANC spent R1 billion on its local government election campaign in 2016, and it is now becoming clear how at least some of this was financed. From booze to braai packs, from cake to cash, and from home security upgrades to Louis Vuitton handbags stuffed with cash, it seems Bosasa would stop at nothing to buy all-too-willing ANC officials. It is now up to South Africa’s law enforcement agencies to investigate these extraordinary allegations. They do not have to wait for the Zondo Commission to complete its work; they must start following the money trail today. Indeed, our law enforcement agencies have a duty to ensure that the upcoming general elections do not get stolen and that the practice of electioneering with the proceeds of crime be stopped. Rampant corruption in the ANC is threatening our very Constitutional democracy as the governing party will stop at nothing to stay in power. Only one party can bring the change South Africa needs and build a corruption-free One South Africa For All. Issued by Natasha Mazzone, DA Team One SA Spokesperson on State Capture, 22 January 2019