Nedbank appoints agencies • Battle to remain relevant in 2019 • Adland’s most-read-about people in 2018 Nedbank appoints agencies by Herman Manson. Nedbank has announced the agencies selected to work on its TTL, sponsorship, and digital marketing communication strategies from 2019. #BigQ2019: The battle to remain relevant in 2019 by Jerry Mpufane. Welcome to 2019 — a very different place. #BigReads2018: Adland's most read about people in 2018 by Herman Manson. Young, Gifted & Killing It, Keith Rose, Mzamo Masito, Khaya Dlanga and Shaka Sisulu were just some of our headline makers for 2018. Media Design: 2018 in review by Shane de Lange. In my analysis of the media design of 2018, I have two raves — xeno-modernism and real craft — and two rants — bad theft and anti-culture, and no low brow. Hermaneutics: Adland in review — restructuring after industry shakeout by Herman Manson. Having initially failed to adapt internally to the rapidly changing agency environment, ad agencies are being forced to restructure. It’s become an increasingly competitive business, too. By Invitation Only: What if we didn’t do one 2019 brand ad? What if we did 20? by Jacques Burger. Perhaps, if we spent less time worrying and workshopping and reverting and we just ran with stuff, more freely, we could do a lot more, a whole lot quicker. Regular Reads Brands & Branding: The (post)modern brand as representation Market Research Wrap: Synergies between meal, supermarkets SA TV Ratings: SABC 1 — primetime top 20 for Oct 2018 On the Radar (ICYMI) Crawford Schools appoints digital agency Jobs, Nando's — SA's year in search WPP announces “radical evolution” — investor day key points Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the twice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.