ANC dumps Methodist minister from January 8 celebrations after 'degrading' comments about women The Methodist Church's Reverend Vukile Mehana will no longer officiate at the ANC's January 8th celebrations, that are expected to take place in Durban next week. The party said in a statement on Wednesday that it had noted with disappointment the comments attributed to Mehana. A private recorded telephone conversation between Mehana and Raymond Sibanga has been shared on social media where the two speak about women in a way many having labelled derogatory. According to EWN, the recording has sparked outrage online, prompting Mehana to apologise for the comments. "The leadership of the ANC has spoken to both the presiding bishop of the Methodist Church of South Africa, Bishop Zipho Siwa and Reverend Mehana. The Methodist Church appealed for space to deal with this matter internally", the party said. In a statement issued on Monday, the Methodist Church called the recording distressing. "We note with dismay the blatant disrespect and portrayal of women who are characterised in a dismissive, humiliating and degrading caricature. The objectifying of the anatomy of women and its link to culture and religion is not only unacceptable, but also equally distasteful," the church said. The church said it was conducting an investigation. News24 *** ANC STATEMENT ON COMMENTS ATTRIBUTED TO ITS CHAPLAIN GENERAL REV MEHANA The ANC has noted with disappointment the utterances attributed to Rev. Vukile Mahana, Chaplain General of the ANC.  The derogatory remarks about women has no place in our country, where our Constitution encourages all of us to work for a truly non-sexist society. The ANC has informed the Presiding Bishop of the Methodist Church of South Africa, Bishop Zipho Siwa that Rev. Mehana will not officiate at the January 8th celebrations planned for next week. The Methodist Church appealed for space to deal with this matter internally. Issued by the ANC, 2 January 2018 *** Update: SACC urges Commission for Gender Equality to look into ANC chaplain-general's 'derogatory' comments about women The South African Council of Churches (SACC) is disgusted by the "shocking and unbelievable utterances" made by Reverend Vukile Mehana, the organisation said in a statement late on Wednesday. An audio recording of a conversation between Mehana – a minister of the Methodist Church of Southern Africa and the ANC's chaplain-general – and Raymond Sibanga has been shared on social media. In the audio clip, the two speak about women pastors in the church in a derogatory manner. SACC general secretary Bishop Malusi Mpumlwana said that Mehana's views on women in the church were "misplaced". "For him to disparage women ministers to the extent of referencing women’s breasts, is absolutely disgusting and must be condemned unequivocally," said Mpumlwana. Mpumlwana added that Mehana’s comments were in conflict with the human rights prescripts of the Constitution, that should be binding on all citizens. "His views on women deserve the urgent attention of the Commission for Gender Equality". On Monday, the Methodist Church said it was conducting an internal investigation into the matter. In a statement, the church called the recording distressing and said that it "noted with dismay the blatant disrespect and portrayal of women who are characterised in a dismissive, humiliating and degrading caricature". "The objectifying of the anatomy of women and its link to culture and religion is not only unacceptable, but also equally distasteful". Mehana has since apologised for the comments. News24