NUM CALLS FOR THE IMMEDIATE EXPULSION OF ALL ESKOM BOARD MEMBERS FOR MISLEADING PRESIDENT CYRIL RAMAPHOSA. The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) demand an immediate expulsion of all Eskom board members for having misinformed the state President Cyril Ramaphosa on the so-called “sabotage conspiracy” at Tutuka power station. Unfortunately, the President of the country has to be ill-informed in that manner by the so-called board members. President Ramaphosa addressed the public about the “sabotage” at Tutuka power station, wherein 2000mw were eliminated from the electricity network. Actually, the President was misled by Eskom board and Management who have ulterior motives of removing a power station Manager. This derogatory behaviour is uncalled for. The FIVE units of Tutuka power station has been producing electricity during the period of load shedding. The sixth plant was on a planned maintenance programme. The weakness of Tutuka power station is poor coal quality as such the plant cannot be operated at full load. The investigation and the increasing of security called by the President are frivolous tactics which will not change the real challenges of the Tutuka power station. Secondly, even though large energy users will be offline during the festive season the promise made by the President that there will be no load-shedding will not be fulfilled. In fact, load shedding will be a daily occurrence until 2025 if we fail to apply proper maintenance plan and invest in a reliable, constant base-load energy resource. It is for such reasons that we demand the resignation of this clueless Board and its Chairman/CEO who never applied for his job. Thirdly, the government must abandon its project of unbundling Eskom, which does not address the Eskom declining sales volumes, the escalating debt of R 480 billion, the ageing infrastructure. The NUM and Numsa coalition has decided to fight against this neoliberal agenda that seeks to dislodge Government from ownership of SOE’s. The programme of mass rolling action will be launched as a welcoming party for the arrival of Mr De Ruyter, followed by a programme of withdrawing labour and marches throughout the country. Finally, we call upon our members and workers at large to remain vigilant and loyal to their professions, regardless of strategies aimed demotivation, victimization and frivolous disciplinary actions that workers are exposed to on daily basis. NUM members are ready to fight tooth and nail on the ill-informed Eskom plans. Mayihlome ihlasele Statement issued by Paris Mashego: NUM Eskom Energy Sector Coordinator, 13 December 2019