Western Cape on load shedding 10 December 2019 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));This morning I received a briefing on the situation in the province from our Provincial Disaster Management Teams and from Eskom. This follows the severe loadshedding that has occurred this week, and which necessitated me calling on President Cyril Ramaphosa to urgently undertake a range of measures to ensure he takes the lead to fix this dire situation.  Eskom has indicated that the situation is under control and that residents should not panic. Assurances were made that these loadshedding periods are a control measure, and that the situation is being managed. The prognosis for loadshedding remains high for the remainder of the week. I also received briefings from SAPS, our Disaster Management teams and various provincial departments to determine their state of readiness for major power outages and the major risks they face should sustained power outages become a reality. I was assured that a clear emergency contingency plan is in place for any eventuality, and that the Joint Operations Centre is already functioning 24/7 as a matter of precaution. Key departments and agencies have cancelled leave, and I am assured that staff will be available over the festive period. My Director General, Harry Malila, will be holding an emergency top management meeting this afternoon to ensure that all departments systems’ and business continuity plans are tested to ensure that they are fully functional. This will include ensuring that generators are fully functional, and other emergency procedures are in place. Our key frontline service delivery departments already have preparedness plans in place. We are working with the City of Cape Town to ensure that the weekend’s Sevens Rugby tournament, a major tourism event and a big contributor to our economy, is able to go ahead without issue. In terms our health and education departments: We have significant generator capacity installed at our healthcare facilities; We are ensuring that manufacturers of oxygen for patients, which require an uninterrupted power supply, are able to continue operating; We are ensuring power supply to make sure Matric exam results are captured by 17 December. We have learnt from the recent drought that communities have the biggest impact in making a difference. Eskom has confirmed to us that the efforts of citizens can and do make a difference. In this regard I know that Cape Town and Western Cape residents are ready to play their part to light the way forward. This can be done by turning off geysers except for at key times of the day, and limiting usage of appliances like washing machines, tumble dryers, air conditioners, electric stoves and swimming pool pumps. Residents can be proactive by: Ensuring that cellphones are fully charged. If possible, charge additional power banks as well. Keeping extra water on hand in the event that pressure is diminished. Ensuring vehicles and home generators are fueled. Stocking up on additional lighting sources like candles and battery powered lights. Knowing their loadshedding schedules for their areas and planning their daily routine in advance. While we know that residents will do what is required, what we need is a long-term solution, and only the President has the power to fix our power. We look forward to his leadership in responding to this matter of public urgency. *** Premier Winde: Eskom - Mr President, show leadership to avoid Day 8 Loadshedding has already had a severe impact on our economy.  We had all become accustomed to the impact of daily loadshedding, but the introduction of Stage 6 blackouts - in and of themselves a blow to our economic growth prospects -  have crystallised the possibility of the worst case scenario: Stage 8 and total darkness. We are standing on the brink. It's time for the country to pull together. It's time for the President to lead us through this. Mr President, here in the Western Cape we know what it’s like to see disaster looming large. We all but ran out of water, but we avoided Day Zero. As a society, we did this by pulling together and doing what was necessary to make it through. Government did this with a flexible, innovative approach which included knowing we didn't have all the answers. We all did this by listening to the excellent advice of other spheres of government, including national government. The private sector did this by helping with technology and efficiencies. Our communities did this by making huge efforts at the individual and family level. We all pulled together. And we did it. Mr President, this approach is exactly what South Africa needs now to avoid Day Eight: Let’s not wait for court action to allow Small Embedded Generation. Allow Municipalities to purchase from IPP’s with out long red tape processes.  There is no time to waste. Convene an urgent meeting with Eskom, the Ministers of Energy and Public Enterprises, Disaster Management and provincial Premiers to plan the next 6 months of energy interventions. Gather up the country - and even the world’s  - foremost experts on energy and lets urgently see what can be done to steady our supply in this moment of crisis. From our side Mr President we have activated our Disaster Management Centre to make sure the Western Cape is ready for any blackout scenario in a way that mitigates the impact on our people. I will visit the disaster management centre this morning for an update. Mr President - show us the leadership we all need by taking these important measures and we will stand with you. You have the power to fix our power. Issued by Bianca Capazorio, Spokesperson to Premier, 10 January 2019  eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0']));  