Suspension of Chief Executive of CSA The Board of Directors of Cricket South Africa (CSA) has taken a decision to put the Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Thabang Moroe, on precautionary suspension with pay, effective 06 December 2019, on allegations of misconduct, pending further investigations. The decision to place Mr Thabang Moroe on precautionary suspension follows from the reports received by the Social and Ethics Committee and the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board related to possible failure of controls in the organisation. During the course of Mr. Thabang Moroe’s precautionary suspension, a forensic audit of critical aspects of the business and the conduct of management related to such aspects shall be conducted by an independent forensic team. In this regard, we urge all our stakeholder including sponsors, members of staff, players, volunteers and cricket fans to allow this process to unfold and we will provide updates on this matter. In the interim, the Board of Directors has mandated the Chairman to look at various options including holding discussions with Mr. Dave Richardson, the former Chief Executive Officer of the International Cricket Council (ICC), regarding the appointment of an Acting Chief Executive Officer for the duration of Mr. Thabang Moroe’s precautionary suspension. Statement issued by CSA, 6 December 2019 *** Thabang Moroe's statement on Tuesday, 3 December 2019: Media Statement: Cricket South Africa Tuesday, 03 December 2019 2019 has been a challenging year for Cricket South Africa. As CEO of CSA, it is my responsibility to articulate solutions for the way forward and to take you, our stakeholders, into my confidence, in order to rebuild trust in brand Cricket South Africa. To this end, I address this to the Board of CSA, our Members, our Partners and Sponsors, SANEF, and the many journalists, and the Fans of the incredible sport of cricket. I unreservedly apologise on behalf of Cricket South Africa for the erroneous process that led to journalists having accreditation revoked. I am proud to live in a free and fair South Africa where each and every one of us has the ability to compliment and criticise any organisation, including my own for my and/or my team's efforts. Too many people have made the ultimate sacrifice for the privilege of free speech and I'd like to apologise to SANEF and all of your members for any harm that was caused during our accreditation error in judgement. We encourage transparent reporting of the highs and lows of Cricket South Africa and every South African institution - public or private. I would also like to apologise to our sponsors for the ambiguity of the CSA tweet yesterday where we thanked our sponsors for their support - it wasn't our intention for that tweet to infer support for the accreditation blunder but instead to thank them for our longstanding partnerships — so Standard Bank, Momentum, KFC, Sunfoil, New Balance, Castle Lager, Ram, Coca-Cola, Powerade, and our numerous supplier partners — my apologies to you. It is understandable that my job as CEO is always under the microscope. It's not just for ethical reasons but for my love of cricket that I adhere to due process, especially during uncomfortable moments. This is evident with the ways in which we are working through a formal process in terms of our recent suspensions, and there seems to be consternation about the appointment of our new Director of Cricket role. What has become apparent and a learning point for us as an organisation, is the absolute need for more dialogue with our stakeholders. To this end, I commit to ensure that the outflow of communications from my organisation is far more frequent and transparent that has happened in the past. We owe this to our Board of CSA, our Members, our Partners and Sponsors, SANEF, journalists, and the Fans of South African cricket. As a start to this new transparent relationship, I can advise you that the CSA Board is meeting for a special sitting, this Saturday. This will be immediately followed by a media conference to communicate the outcomes and next steps to South Africa via the media, including but not limited to the Director of Cricket role, team selection processes for the England tour, and all other Cricket South Africa issues relevant to the South African public. I look forward to new levels of engagement. Thank you T. Moroe CEO Cricket South Africa ENDS 