SASA’s response to media reports of warrant of arrest issued against Anaesthesiologist “We’re extremely concerned about the implications for the larger healthcare system, all healthcare practitioners and our members” eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The South African Society of Anaesthesiologists (SASA) notes with extreme concern, the media reports that a warrant has been issued for the arrest of an anaesthesiologist following the death of a 10 year old child. Any loss of life is tragic. It’s even more so when a child dies. Everyone affected by this death has SASA’s deep sympathy and empathy. The family, public and the professions want to determine exactly how this tragedy occurred. To do so demands transparent, exhaustive and fair investigation that will give us the facts and enable us to do everything possible to prevent something similar happening again. This process is mandated to be undertaken and conducted by regulatory hearings by the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA). As far as SASA is aware this process is well underway. However, the anaesthesiologist is already facing unilateral suspension from clinical practice at a group facility (where processes and regulatory compliance with investigatory findings are yet to be interrogated), and undergoing trial by media and in the court of partially formed public opinion. Now it is reported that a warrant for the arrest has been issued by the authorities on a charge of culpable homicide, pre-empting due, fair and transparent process. SASA is specifically concerned about the implications of this on SASA members, on all healthcare practitioners and on the National Healthcare System. For healthy people, the risk of death under anaesthetic is one in 250 000. Surgery and patient factors carry further risks, with different risks associated with different surgeries. In this context (and specifically for tragic outcomes where negligence is not a factor), doctors can't be expected to practice with the constant threat of suspension and criminal sanction. This action of issuing a warrant of arrest is especially worrying. It's a direct threat to healthcare delivery in South Africa. It's not in the best interests of either the public or the healthcare system. It will not result in delivering answers more quickly to the family of the child who died. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));The vast majority of Doctors are respected professionals in their community and do not pose a flight risk. Our courts have repeatedly warned officials of the National Prosecuting Authority and the South African Police Service that considerable circumspection should be taken before a person is arrested in order to bring him or her before a court. Arrest, by definition, constitutes a serious restriction of the individual's freedom of movement and can also affect his or her dignity and privacy. This is especially true where the presumption of innocence still operates in favour of the accused person. Arrest should only be resorted to where a written warning or summons to appear in court appears to be ineffective (See S v More 1993 (2) SACR 606 (W); Louw & Another v Minister of Safety and Security & Others 2006 (2) SACR 178 (T) and De Kierk v Minister of Police 2019 (12) BCLR 1425 (CC)). Where less intrusive measures are available to ensure the attendance of an accused person before a court, then such measures must be used rather than arrest. As far as we are aware, there has never before been a warrant of arrest issued for a healthcare practitioner in a criminal matter involving medical negligence allegations or culpable homicide. In those instances where it was deemed necessary to institute criminal proceedings against healthcare practitioners, their attendance at court has been secured by warning or summons. There is an important relationship between the often-competing interests of parties to criminal proceedings and their constitutional rights. We do not believe that there is any particular reason why the attendance at court of most any medical specialist in South Africa in active practice should need to be secured by effecting an arrest. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_3',116,'0','0']));SASA supports a thorough interrogation of circumstances around all medically related adverse events with inquiries that are quick, efficient, transparent and fair. SASA calls on the Department of Justice, the National Prosecuting Authority, the South African Police Service and statutory bodies such as the Health Professions Council of South Africa to ensure fair process to healthcare practitioners in our country that does not involve punitive sanction and pre-judgment prior to due process and a fair hearing. We call on Other healthcare professional associations; the legal profession and civil society at large to consider the impact of the precedent being set in this instance by facility groups and the State on the future of healthcare professional practice and the potential negative implications it may have for access to quality healthcare. Statement issued by Natalie Zimmerman, Chief Executive, South African Society of Anaesthesiologists (SASA), 13 December 2019