Tshwane DA Mayor and Speaker reinstated by High Court 6 December 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) welcomes the North Gauteng High Court’s decision this morning to suspend the resolutions taken by the African National Congress (ANC) and Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) at the Tshwane Special Council yesterday, to illegally appoint an Acting Speaker and remove Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa and Speaker Katlego Mathebe from office. We note that the coup d’etat was overturned by the Court and their banana republic behaviour was crushed. The outcome of this ruling means that the DA Mayor and Speaker will retain their positions until the matter is heard in the same high court on 17 December 2019. The DA will not allow this coalition of corruption to reverse the three years of good work done by the DA-led administration in the City of Tshwane. It is certain that in the case of the Tshwane Council yesterday, ignorance allied with power is the most ferocious enemy justice can have. Today is a step in the right direction as justice prevailed. A justice that the Democratic Alliance will continue to fight for. Issued by Mike Moriarty, DA Gauteng Chairperson, 6 December 2019 VTshwane DA Mayor and Speaker reinstated by High Court – Mike Moriarty  DA says it will not allow this coalition of corruption to reverse the three years of good work Tshwane DA Mayor and Speaker reinstated by High Court 6 December 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) welcomes the North Gauteng High Court’s decision this morning to suspend the resolutions taken by the African National Congress (ANC) and Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) at the Tshwane Special Council yesterday, to illegally appoint an Acting Speaker and remove Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa and Speaker Katlego Mathebe from office. We note that the coup d’etat was overturned by the Court and their banana republic behaviour was crushed. The outcome of this ruling means that the DA Mayor and Speaker will retain their positions until the matter is heard in the same high court on 17 December 2019. The DA will not allow this coalition of corruption to reverse the three years of good work done by the DA-led administration in the City of Tshwane. It is certain that in the case of the Tshwane Council yesterday, ignorance allied with power is the most ferocious enemy justice can have. Today is a step in the right direction as justice prevailed. A justice that the Democratic Alliance will continue to fight for. Issued by Mike Moriarty, DA Gauteng Chairperson, 6 December 2019