AfriForum tries to stop BLF from contesting the 2019 elections again Land thieves and racists are terrified that Black First Land First (BLF) will be in parliament after the elections in May. They are doing everything in their power to stop BLF from going to parliament. The racist, right-wing, apartheid-denying AfriForum has illegally obtained court orders to freeze BLF’s bank account. The objective is to try steal BLF’s IEC deposit money and therefore stop us from contesting the elections. BLF received an email from First National Bank (FNB), which we bank with, informing our movement that our account has been frozen on behalf of AfriForum. Our movement has since confirmed that our account is indeed blocked. BLF has been aware of this evil plan and has secured most of the funds for deposit for National Assembly. First it was Johann Rupert and the Oppenheimer family which stopped the BLF crowdfunding campaign. Now it’s AfriForum desperately trying to stop BLF from going to parliament. They will not succeed. BLF will be on the ballot. BLF is going to parliament! BLF takes these new efforts to attach its assets as nothing but a declaration of war. BLF is broke, just like the landless black majority. Our movement survives through donations from black people who give the little that they have to make sure we stay afloat. Black people have been donating to make sure BLF pays the IEC deposit so the BLF is able to contest the 2019 elections. The racist AfriForum which is made up of land thieves, is now taking the people’s contributions to the #TakeBLFToParliament campaign, in order to ensure that parliament remains an entity for those who are controlled by white monopoly capital. We call on all the people who have been donating into the BLF account as part of helping raise the deposit to stop doing so. BLF will announce an alternative process soon. BLF wishes to make it clear, we are going to parliament, nothing will stop us! The voice of the landless will be there! Issued by the National Coordinating Committee of Black First Land First (BLF – NCC), 26 February 2019