DA calls on Premier Mokgoro to declare North West a drought disaster area to assist the agri-sector 4 February 2019 The DA in the North West has written to Premier Job Mokgoro calling on him to immediately begin a process to declare the province a drought disaster area so that emergency resources can be unlocked in order to assist commercial, emerging, subsistence farmers as well as the entire agri-sector value chain. The agri-sector in the North West is in dire need of emergency assistance following several years of drought. Premier Mokgoro’s administration should engage with all relevant stakeholders to craft an impactful strategy to bring relief to the agri-sector. The DA is willing to assist in the drafting of an emergency relief strategy for the agri-sector and to assist with its implementation and monitoring. Unfortunately, previous emergency assistance extended in the North West never reached the most desperate in need, since the failing ANC gobbled up most of the emergency funds through corruption, paying inflated prices to implementing agents and a general disregard towards organisations within the agri-sector and failure to utilise their expertise. The negative impact of the drought, compounded by the hostile attitude towards the agri-sector by the failing ANC government and other far-left organisations. The failing ANC’s poor policy and implementation in support programmes, especially for emerging farmers, and the failed land reform process all threaten food security and the economic viability of the entire agri-sector value chain. Should an emergency intervention not be forthcoming in the North West, it will result in increased unemployment, which will further expand the inequality gap and entrench poverty. The DA will continue to push for emergency aid and will ensure that the funds made available reach those most in need. Only the DA has the policies and the experience in government to successfully address the concerns of the agri-sector, whether it be land reform, improving access to markets and emergency assistance. Which is why the agri-sector in the Western Cape continues to exceed its targets, growing the economy and creating jobs. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 4 February 2019