Distell consolidates, appoints bespoke WPP agency by Herman Manson. Distell has consolidated and awarded its account to a new WPP bespoke agency led by Fran Luckin and Paul Jackson. #AgencyLeaders2018: Most admired creative leader in Joziby Herman Manson. We kick off this week with the Jozi creative leaders most admired by their peers during 2018. Below are the rest of the Cape Town results from last week. The one to watch in Cape Town in 2019!Agency diversity & transformation CTMost-admired ad agency in Cape TownMost-admired ad agency boss in Cape Town #FOCUS: Mental health & wellbeing in SA adlandby Herman Manson. Mental health and wellbeing have long been a subject of discussion in virtually every industry you can think off. Yet, in the South African advertising and marketing industries, at least, little headway seems to have been made in going beyond talking. #Campaigns: Sounding out Mastercard’s modern brand identityby Carey Finn. Why the new signature melody has industry cranking up the volume.By Invitation Only: Where is the love this Valentine’s Day?by Nomfundo Dukada. One thing that’s stood out for me is the heteronormativity concept of some Valentine's Day campaign messaging. #Marketers: Prof Elaine Rumboll & the pursuit of creativityby Julie Pughe-Parry. According to Prof Elaine Rumboll, the only way to overcome the double-edged nature of creativity is to embrace uncertainty. Regular Reads Media Design: Albert, Das Plakat, Field, Süddeutsche Zeitung and Frieze, Intern, MK Bruce Lee, Vanity FairSA TV Ratings primetime top 20 for Dec, Nov 2018: SABC 2, SABC 1Market Research Wrap: Understanding today’s youth market; ad industry still getting gender wrong; and the art of contextualising global trends On the Radar New Jozi CD for Digitas LiquoriceWunderman Thompson unveils brand IDLoeries now open for entries Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.