DA reiterates its call for a review of all Bosasa contracts 1 February 2019 The DA welcomes the announcement by the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services that all contracts with Africa Global Operations, formerly Bosasa, and his Department will be reviewed. This follows the DA’s legal representatives letter on 18 January to President Cyril Ramaphosa calling for a full audit of all departments and state-owned entities and their relationships to Bosasa. The announcement that the Department of Correctional Services will be reviewed is welcome, but only illustrates why it is important for an audit to be completed across government. The DA-run Western Cape Government has shown leadership by initiating such an audit, showing how confident we are that there have been no corrupt dealings. However, we cannot accept that it will be the President’s Keeper, Arthur Fraser, who will be investigating Bosasa’s relationship with the Department. In April 2018, Ramaphosa transferred Fraser from the State Security Agency amid allegations of corruption and his blatant efforts to block an investigation by the Inspector-General of Intelligence. The DA opposed this move, arguing that it was irrational and unconstitutional, and approached the North Gauteng High Court to review and set aside the President’s decision to appoint him as National Commissioner of Correctional Services. Considering that Ramaphosa spared Fraser the axe, it is entirely inappropriate for him to now be tasked with investigating corruption by the company that financially supported Ramaphosa’s campaign to become ANC president and, ultimately, the president of South Africa. Ramaphosa has been conspicuously silent on the Bosasa matter. At a time when South Africa needs leadership, he has been missing in action. Latest developments show once again that the DA is a party of action and has what it takes to get stuff done. Building One SA for All requires leadership that will never be found in the ANC. Issued by James Selfe, DA Federal Council Chairperson, 1 February 2019