2019 ELECTION MANIFESTO – EFF OUR LAND AND JOBS NOW! PEOPLES’ MANIFESTO AND A PLAN OF ACTION FOREWORD BY THE PRESIDENT AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF  JULIUS MALEMA FOREWORD The year 2019 marks exactly 25 years since the attainment of political freedom in South Africa. As observed in the Founding Manifesto of the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF), political freedom in South Africa has hardly translated into observable economic emancipation. Black people remain landless, they remain on the margins of economic production and outside of life-enhancing economic participation. The majority of those that participate in the economy do so as suppliers of cheap and easily disposable labour. Landlessness and joblessness among black South Africans are at crisis levels, posing the biggest challenges that confront South African society today. While focusing on clear, implementable and decisive programmes for all spheres of governance, the EFF’s emphasis for the 2019 general elections will be on LAND and JOBS. Consequently, the EFF’s theme for the 2019 elections is: OUR LAND AND JOBS NOW. The emphasis on LAND derives from the fact that 25 years since the attainment political freedom, 80% of the population continues to occupy less than 10% of South Africa’s land. The emphasis on JOBS is motivated by the sad reality that after 25 years of attempts at addressing the matter, more than seven million capable South Africans who need jobs are unemployed, with no hope that anything will change unless the current government is changed. The emphasis on NOW is informed by the fact that 25 years is a rather long time for any political party to keep making empty promises. The emphasis on NOW is also because our people live in absolute poverty. Similarly, the emphasis on NOW is because our people are landless. The emphasis on NOW is because our people are jobless. Yet again the emphasis on NOW is because the crises of racialised poverty, inequality, underdevelopment, landlessness and joblessness are being experienced NOW, and must be resolved NOW! More fundamentally, the emphasis on NOW is because we cannot postpone the true liberation of our people from economic apartheid. We are not part of the 1994 elite pact. We are a completely new generation, with new demands. And our demands, unlike those of the 1994 generation, will not be postponed. We refuse to be silenced with so-called reconciliation. We want justice now. We want our land now. We want jobs now. We demand the economy NOW! It is our considered view that the political change-over in 1994, did not bring true liberation. It was a bluff which continues to subject black people to economic and social apartheid. This economic apartheid must end now. The demand for land and jobs now is the demand to end apartheid because it is now evident that apartheid did not end in 1994. We are not part of the CODESA compromises, which only focused on taking over political power without the control of the economy. We are a generation that is fighting for true economic emancipation NOW! The economy in South Africa continues today to be under the ownership and control of white minority settlers, whose ownership and control of land in particular, were gained through settler colonialism and its corollary - the dispossession of the black colonised. Other sectors of the economy, such as the retail chains, industry and the financial sector, are also owned and controlled by the white minority in South Africa. All the means of economic survival and existence continue to be controlled by the white minority. All of this continues to be the case two decades after the country attained political freedom. The black majority, and Africans in particular, are the numerical majority, yet they continue to be the economic minority, living under difficult conditions and perennially begging for participation in and benefit from what is a white- owned economy linked to the global capitalist system. The few black people who participate in the economy, do so, subject to white approval through a black economic empowerment model that is ostensibly designed to benefit a small number of individuals without ever changing the structural exclusion of the majority. The post-1994 governments have dismally failed to transfer economic power to the black majority and, even worse, to optimally use government ownership and control of certain state assets for the benefit of all South Africans. Instead, they have reproduced and worsened apartheid economic inequalities, such that a prominent defining characteristic of all post-1994 governments is their perpetuation of economic apartheid defined along racial lines. Whilst political apartheid has been abolished, economic and social apartheid remain a stark reality, evidenced by the fact that poverty is associated with blackness and wealth with whiteness. The Economic Freedom Fighters has demonstrated in its five years of existence, through various interventions and political leadership in different spheres of influence, that it is the only political movement that will bring about real economic change in South Africa. As a movement, we carry collective and individual capacity that will fundamentally change South Africa’s economy in a manner that will allow us to reclaim economic ownership, expand the productive economy, give black people real ownership, create jobs and drive inclusive development. The EFF’s political programme is the only programme that is embedded in the interests of all South Africans, having been organically developed to meet people’s demands. The manifesto we present hereafter for the 2019 general elections is therefore not a wish list of unattainable goals, but a clear programme of action of what we will do when elected as government of South Africa. The EFF Manifesto 2019 is based on primarily three sources: a) The numerous submissions the EFF received from different sectors through public consultations, which included public meetings, letters to different organisations, social media inputs and oral submissions; b) The Founding Manifesto of the EFF; and c) The collective experience the EFF gained through its participation in Parliament, Provincial Legislatures and Municipal Councils. It is important to highlight that the EFF’s political programme is underpinned by the desire for ECONOMIC FREEDOM IN OUR LIFETIME. This is a generational clarion call that we will never deviate from. The EFF’s manifesto commitments for the 2019 general elections are inspired by as well as based on our movement’s seven cardinal pillars, which constitute the core of our approach to genuine revolutionary transformation of society for the better. The seven pillars are: a. Expropriation of South Africa’s land without compensation, for equal redistribution in use b. Nationalisation of mines, banks and other strategic sectors of the economy, without compensation c. Building state and government capacity, which will lead to the abolishment of tenders d. Free quality education, health care, houses and sanitation e. Massive protected industrial development to create millions of sustainable jobs, including the introduction of minimum wage(s) in order to close the wage gap between the rich and the poor, close the apartheid wage gap and promote rapid career paths for Africans in the workplace f. Massive development of the African economy and advocating for a move from reconciliation to justice on the entire continent g. Open, accountable, corrupt-free government and society without fear of victimisation by state agencies. The seven cardinal pillars and all the areas which the manifesto covers are of crucial importance to us in their totality, while specific emphasis is being placed on LAND and JOBS. It is our firm belief that the crisis levels of poverty, inequality and underdevelopment being experienced in the country can be ended by the reclamation and equitable redistribution of the land and the creation of millions of jobs. The current government has spectacularly demonstrated that it is incapable both now and in the foreseeable future to economically empower all South Africans. The EFF does not promote job creation at any cost. The quality of jobs and the quality of life in the workplace are also of utmost importance. The role of trade unions therefore needs to be specifically guaranteed and protected. The wage gap is also one of the biggest contributors to inequality. Statistics show that in South Africa, the wealthiest three billionaires own more wealth than the poorest 26 million citizens. Globally, it will take four days for the CEOs of the world’s largest fashion companies to earn what a clothing worker in those companies earns in a lifetime. Economic wealth therefore must be transferred from the hands of the few to the hands of the many. The EFF’s manifesto takes into consideration various domestic, regional, global, geo-political, economic and industrial developments. We particularly take into consideration that we have the obligation to present a credible JOBS strategy in the era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, which could reduce the number of people employed to produce goods and services for a wage. The Manifesto will address these developments in a manner that appreciates reality and yet achieves maximum benefits. What distinguishes the EFF’s 2019, election manifesto from all other election manifestos is that it makes specific commitments with timelines and clearly specifies areas that will receive the deliverables, illustrating the movement’s readiness and preparedness to govern on behalf of the people. The era of meaningless and broad promises is over. The EFF’s quantitative and qualitative growth has taught us that we should always stay in contact with the people and understand their demands and aspirations. Some of the policy innovations contained in this manifesto include: a) Land redistribution policies which will guarantee land access by all landless people for residential, industrial, cultural, religious and recreational purposes; b) Multiple special economic zones to promote inward industrialisation and manufacturing investments with export capacity in order to make the ownership and control of the economy demographically representative, expand its productive capacity and create millions of jobs; c) Doubling of social grants in order to reduce the crisis levels of poverty and boost domestic economic demands and expansion; d) Usage of legislated state procurement as a boost for localisation and creation of sustainable quality jobs, prioritising women and the youth; e) Reconfiguration of the spheres of government into national and local spheres and eliminating the provincial sphere in order to redirect resources to impactful service delivery and investments; and f) Amending the constitution to make the National Prosecutions Authority (NPA) a Chapter 9, institution accountable to Parliament in order to stop selective prosecutions and fight corruption. Fellow South Africans, Commissars, Fighters, and all Ground Forces, the EFF hereby presents our commitments, a programme of action and a clearly articulated plan on what we will do when elected to govern on behalf of the people. These are not empty promises. They are clear commitments that will be realised under the decisive and capable leadership of the Economic Freedom Fighters. The clarion call is clear: OUR LAND AND JOBS NOW! VICTORY IS CERTAIN! Revolutionary regards, Julius Sello Malema *** INTRODUCTION The EFF’s election manifesto will focus on the key areas set out below. It should be highlighted that each focus area will have a localised expression and jobs dividend. A. WHERE DOES THE ECONOMIC FREEDOM FIGHTERS MOVEMENT COME FROM AND WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED? B. DIAGNOSIS: WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS IN SOUTH AFRICA TODAY? C. THE EFF’S COMMITMENTS AND PLAN OF ACTION ON: 1) LAND 2) JOBS 3) CORRUPTION 4) GENDER, WOMEN AND LGBTQI 5) YOUTH DEVELOPMENT 6) CRIME 7) EDUCATION 8) HEALTH 9) HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, WATER AND SANITATION 10) PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES 11) TRADITIONAL LEADERS 12) ENERGY 13) MINING 14) FINANCIAL SECTOR 15) SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 16) STATE CAPACITY 17) AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 18) ECONOMY 19) JUSTICE SYSTEM AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES 20) CONSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE AND DEMOCRATIC PARTICIPATION 21) ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE 22) FISCAL FRAMEWORK 23) SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 24) SPORTS, ARTS, CULTURE AND RECREATION 25) INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY 26) INFRASTRUCTURE 27) ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE 28) INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS A. WHERE DOES THE ECONOMIC FREEDOM FIGHTERS MOVEMENT COME FROM AND WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED? The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) is a revolutionary socialist economic emancipation movement founded in 2013, in South Africa to fight for economic freedom in our lifetime. The EFF is a registered political party with 890 public representatives in the National Assembly, the National Council of Provinces, Provincial Legislatures and Municipal Councils. Since its formation, the EFF has, among many others, registered the following victories: 1) Through various efforts the EFF led the country into discussing the amendment of the constitution to realise the expropriation of land without compensation for equal redistribution. 2) The EFF got former President Mr Jacob Zuma to pay back money spent on non-security-related upgrades at his homestead in Nkandla. 3) The EFF effectively led a political process that stopped the Gupta criminal syndicate from running the country’s government and key state-owned companies. 4) The EFF used its Parliamentary participation to table the following laws, which will fundamentally change the economic architecture of South Africa to benefit ordinary South Africans: i. The National Health Amendment Bill, which will ensure that all clinics in South Africa are open 24 hours a day; ii. The Insourcing of all Government and State Entities Bill, which will result in the insourcing of all workers who provide constant services to government and state companies; iii. The Illegalisation of Alcohol Advertisement Bill, which will end the celebration and promotion of alcohol consumption in South Africa; iv. The Banks Amendment Bill, which will lead to the creation of a state-owned bank; and v. The Nationalisation of the South African Reserve Bank Bill, which will discontinue private ownership of the central bank. 5) The EFF used its Parliamentary participation to table motions which sought to achieve the following: i. Provision of free-fee education for the poor at higher education level, which was rejected by the ruling party; ii. Increase in mineworkers’ salaries and improvement of their working conditions; iii. Repeal of all apartheid legislation and laws that continue to govern South African society; iv. Nationalisation of banks and changing how state- owned companies are managed; and v. Submission on illicit financial flows, tax avoidance and base erosion in Parliament as well as to SARS and the Davis Tax Committee. 6) The EFF led and supported land occupation programmes which resulted in residential land being given to many landless people in all the provinces. 7) The EFF led a decisive political programme that resulted in the admission of more than 100 000 students to institutions of higher learning without their having to pay any fees. 8) The EFF’s public representatives and leadership have individually and collectively assisted many communities with: i. Implements for agricultural productivity, including tractors; ii. School assistance programmes and bursaries that help hundreds of schoolchildren; iii. School uniforms and vital learning and teaching support materials; iv. Many labour disputes that prevented racism, dismissals and retrenchments; and v. Legal representation that prevents evictions. 9) The EFF caucuses at provincial and local levels tabled insourcing bills and motions for government to disallow anyone to work for government through a third party to provide common services such as cleaning, gardening, security guards etc. 10) The EFF caucuses in Johannesburg, Tshwane and Nelson Mandela Bay tabled successful motions on the insourcing of municipality workers, as a result of which thousands of security guards are now full-time employees with proper salaries at the municipalities. 11) The EFF caucuses in Johannesburg and Tshwane tabled successful motions to have clinics remain open 24 hours a day. As a result, clinics in cities are now open 24 hours, seven days a week. 12) The EFF had Parliament debate the plight of ‘Fees Must Fall’ activists in support of all activists who were arrested and remained behind bars or who were involved in court cases or awaiting trial in prison. 13) The EFF in KwaZulu-Natal tabled a motion for the discontinuation of all contracts with KPMG by provincial government. The motion was adopted by the provincial legislature. 14) The EFF in Rustenburg tabled a motion to reinstate 100 workers whose employment with the Council had been wrongfully terminated. The motion was adopted by the Council. 15) The EFF in Bela-Bela tabled a motion for a land expropriation programme. As a result, the Council allocated 700 fully serviced stands to deserving recipients. 16) The EFF in Modimolle tabled a motion for the Municipal Council to scrap all debt that indigent people owed. The motion was adopted by the Council. 17) The EFF in Nelson Mandela Bay tabled a motion for the insourcing of security guards, with a salary increase from R4 000 to R11 000. The motion was adopted by the Council. 18) The EFF secured transport for learners who previously had to walk long distances to school in Buffalo City. 19) The EFF in Matjhabeng in Free State helped 95 workers who had been employed on contract for more than ten years to secure full-time positions. 20) The EFF protected the independence of the office of the Public Protector. 21) The EFF has made politics fashionable and worthy. 22) The EFF has made Parliament vibrant. 23) The EFF has helped many people with legal representation, including artists. 24) The EFF fought for the insourcing of workers at institutions of higher learning such as Wits University, University of South Africa (UNISA), University of Kwa Zulu/Natal (UKZN) and University of Pretoria (UP). 25) The EFF pushed President Zuma out of office through a motion of no confidence. 26) The EFF introduced secret voting in Parliament. 27) The EFF has gained credibility at institutions of higher learning by constantly winning SRC elections. 28) Wherever the EFF led the SRC, poor students were provided with free sanitary towels and one meal a day. 29) The EFF effectively gave land to 50 000 people who were landless. 30) The EFF helped to remove corrupt government officials at Nelson Mandela, Tshwane, Johannesburg, Thabazimbi, Modimolle, Mogale City and Jozini municipal councils. 31) The EFF has built the confidence of black people and confronted racism everywhere where it encounters it. 32) The EFF is the only party that has a higher gender balance in Parliament, provincial legislature and municipal councils. The EFF has had many collective and individual victories in all the provinces and numerous municipalities, some which cannot for reasons of space be included here. In sum it has brought hope to ordinary South Africans and revived their confidence in politics. DIAGNOSIS: WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS IN SOUTH AFRICA TODAY? 1) The large majority of black South Africans are landless, and the post-1994 governments have cumulatively bought less than 7% of the targeted 30% of land meant for redistribution, over a period of 25 years. 2) Close to 40% of South Africans who need jobs are unemployed, meaning that more than nine million South Africans who need jobs and are capable of working cannot find employment. The present government has failed dismally in devising a strategy for creating employment for all, and unemployment has since 1994, never been below 20%. 3) The South African governments have consistently over the past 25 years adopted a legislative and policy framework according to which service delivery is completely dependent on external service providers and tenders. Thus, the government itself lacks the capability to perform basic/core government functions. 4) The food economy in South Africa is dominated by the white minority at all levels, from land ownership and agricultural production to the packaging and retailing of food - nothing has changed since 1994. 1. The South African economy has not fully developed its productive capacity to provide jobs for millions of unemployed people and is still heavily dependent on the importation of finished goods and products. 2. South Africa’s education system is not well positioned to respond to the Fourth Industrial Revolution due to a lack of high-technology infrastructure, and the post-secondary education and training institutions cannot absorb all learners from secondary schools. 3. South Africa’s health care system excludes a substantial number of South Africans, and the country is sadly, still far from achieving universal health coverage. 4. Millions of South Africans still reside in unsafe human settlements and remain trapped in poverty. 5. South Africa has extra-ordinarily high levels of crime. An average of 20 000 murders are committed annually, and huge numbers of violent crimes are not properly resolved. 6. Social development and assistance do not deliver impactful results in resolving the massive poverty and inequality challenges. 7. South Africa’s criminal justice system does not serve justice to poor people, and its correctional services system is not corrective. 8. South Africa’s energy plan and capacity are not dependable enough to allow for massive industrialisation and reliable household usage. 9. South Africa’s environmental management does not adequately address the protection of the climate because of the country’s complete dependence on polluting energy sources. 10. The financial sector in South Africa is owned and controlled by a financial cartel that excludes and discriminates against many people on racial grounds. 11. South Africa’s fiscal architecture permanently incapacitates the state from achieving basic service delivery demands, and taxes are not maximally collected from the private sector. 12. South Africa has trivialised science and technology and is thus not maximising the potential thereof to improve people’s lives. 13. South Africa’s international relations policies are not positioned to maximally benefit the country. 14. Women in South Africa are still at the margins of economic empowerment and are largely excluded from senior positions in both the private and public sectors. 15. People with disabilities are not optimally taken care of. 16. South Africa’s infrastructure back-log is still massive, particularly in areas where black people reside. 17. The role of traditional leadership is not clearly defined, and this leads to abuse of the institution of traditional leadership. 18. South Africa’s architecture of procurement leads to massive corruption in both the private and public sectors. 19. In South Africa, women are violently abused and killed every day. South Africa is thus considered a rape capital. 20. In South Africa, there is no free education. 21. In South Africa, 55% of young people are unemployed and cannot find work. 22. Data is expensive in South Africa. 23. In South Africa, black people live on dumping sites. 24. In South Africa, drug abuse and gangsterism are prevalent. 25. In South Africa, leadership recipients are paid poorly and exploited. 26. In South Africa, teenage pregnancy is extremely high. 27. In South Africa, violence against the LGBTQI community is prevalent. 28. In South Africa, anti-black racism and xenophobia against Africans are on the rise. 29. South Africa’s local government is extremely underfunded. 30. In South Africa, artists are underpaid. Their jobs are not protected, and many die poor, as a consequence. 31. In South Africa, women in sports are paid less than their male counterparts. 32. South Africa has a bloated cabinet with useless deputy ministers. 33. South Africa still has apartheid murders. 34. South Africa still uses an apartheid national anthem. 35. In South Africa, streets, buildings, towns and monuments are still named after apartheid icons. 36. South Africa has one of the highest school dropout rates. 37. South Africa has insufficient learning spaces and accommodation at institutions of higher learning. 38. South Africa still has schools where children learn under trees or in mud structures and/or must use pit toilets. 39. South Africa still has bucket toilets. 40. South Africa still has bogus initiation schools which lead to death. 41. South Africa still has a huge, widening gap between poor and rich people. 42. In South Africa, there are still kids who walk kilometres to school and back. THE EFF’S COMMITMENT AND PLAN OF ACTION LAND 1. The EFF government will ensure that the amendment of Section 25 of the 1996 South African Constitution to allow expropriation of land without compensation for equal redistribution and use is carried through with immediate effect. 2. All land will be under the custodianship of the state, for equal redistribution to all. 3. The EFF government will pass accompanying legislation such as a Land Redistribution Act and an Agrarian Reform Act. 4. The EFF government will discontinue ownership of land by a few and ensure that all South African land is owned by all South African people through the principle of progressive state custodianship of land. 5. The EFF government will redistribute land in a manner that is demographically representative, meaning that black people will accordingly control the majority of the land, as they constitute the majority in South Africa. 6. The EFF government will redistribute a minimum of 50% of the land to be controlled by women and the youth. 7. The EFF government will abolish foreign land ownership. 8. The EFF government will establish a People’s Land Council to manage and redistribute land to all those who need it for residential and productive purposes. 9. The EFF government will establish a land ombudsman to ensure that people’s rights to the land are protected and not subjected to arbitrary abuse by state officials and injudicious mining companies. 10. The EFF government will reconfigure the Land Claims Court into the People’s Land Court which will be constituted by no less than ten permanent judges in order to speed up the resolution of all land disputes. 11. The EFF government will once and for all guarantee that the right to land of people living in communal areas, such as the people of Xolobeni, is an absolute right, and that no one has authority to dispossess indigenous people of their right to land for the benefit of a few capitalists. 12. The EFF government will develop a new system of land rights registration to ensure that communal and customary land rights are recordable and offered the same protection as other forms of rights over land. 13. The EFF government will abolish rentals of all residential land. 14. The EFF government will allocate land for residential, agriculture and industrial usage for free. 15. The EFF government will allocate land for residential purposes with inheritance rights. 16. The EFF government will not abolish the rights of traditional leaders in the allocation and redistribution of land. 17. The EFF government will nationalise all game reserves, particularly the game reserves in Waterberg region in Limpopo and uMkhanyakude region of Kwazulu-Natal, bringing them under the management of South African National Parks (SANParks). JOBS As of 2019, South Africa has a workforce of 25.4 million people with the capacity to work. Only 16.4 million of them have jobs while the remaining nine million are unemployed, meaning that 35% of South Africans who are seeking employment are jobless. To create jobs, the EFF government will do the following: 1. The EFF government will ensure and lead massive and protected sustainable industrial development and diversification to create millions of decent jobs between 2019 and 2024. This will happen through state-led industrialisation, industrial diversification, the protection of infant and existing industries, the transfer of ownership to black people through subsidies, an increase in tariffs, and state-aided marketing and promotion of South African products internally, across the continent and worldwide, with a focus on key, progressive and most beneficial trading partners. 2. The EFF government will declare multiple special economic zones in various regions of South Africa, clearly emphasising that each investor will gain special economic zone benefits such as tax incentives and factory building allowances if they each employ and sustain a minimum of 2 000 jobs. 3. The EFF government will ensure that a minimum of 80% of the goods and services procured by the state at all levels and at all state companies are domestically produced. 4. The EFF government will ensure that a minimum of 50% of all South Africa’s mineral resources are locally beneficiated, processed and value added. 5. The EFF government will ensure that all food for local consumption is produced and processed on a massive scale in South Africa. This will happen through the intensification of small-scale farming and agriculture and by giving strategic support to all small-scale agricultural operations, including providing trade routes. All food traders in South Africa will be compelled by law to buy South African food products and to support operations that produce these food products. 6. The EFF government will build sustainable food processing zones that will supply food items to other parts of the world, particularly the rest of Africa, China, Latin America and India. This will lead to the creation of millions of jobs across the entire food chain. 7. The EFF government will help communities in the coastal areas to start agro-fishing corporates and businesses, which will be their main source of income and livelihoods. 8. The EFF government will ensure that all products and goods that contribute to state construction projects are locally produced, bar exceptional cases where there is no capacity to produce locally. 9. The EFF government will ensure the development, protection and localisation of industries which produce basic and daily used goods through import substitution mechanisms. These include: - Glasses, cups, plates, spoons, pots etc. - Tiles and energy-efficient building materials - Furniture, energy-efficient light bulbs and decorating materials - Solar water geysers, insulation material and energy-efficient products - Washing products and soap - Electronics - Basic energy-efficient electronics - The textile industry including, clothing and shoes, and - Agro-processing of food. 10. The EFF government will ensure that small and medium- sized enterprises are given strategic support and that legislation is passed to ensure that key industrial inputs and services to big corporates and companies are provided by SMMEs. 11. The EFF government will protect the right of street hawkers and informal traders to trade in a safe and clean environment in all the cities of South Africa without fear of police harassment. 12. The EFF government will prohibit the confiscation of street traders’ goods as a means of enforcing municipal by-laws. 13. The EFF government will amend the PFMA and MFMA to compel national, provincial and state-owned entities to procure 80% of all goods from local producers and a minimum of 50% from producers of which 50% is owned and controlled by women and the youth. 14. The EFF government will build and support state-owned trading and retail platforms in every municipality. 15. The EFF government will declare the following areas as special economic zones with zero company taxes and a building allowance in exchange for each investor creating 2 000 full-time jobs, paying a minimum wage and pension contributions: Free State 1. QwaQwa in the Thabomofutsanyana region 2. Thabanchu in the Mangaung region 3. Deneysville in the Fezile Dabie region Eastern Cape 1. Butterworth in the Amathole region 2. Mount Ayliff and Mbizana in the Alfred Nzo region 3. Cofimvaba in the Chris Hani region 4. Graaff-Reinet in the Cacadu region 5. Mthatha and Port St Johns in the OR Tambo region 6. Sterkspruit in the Joe Gqabi region 7. King Williams Town in the Amathole region Mpumalanga 1. Bushbuck Ridge and Mjindini in the Enhlanzeni region 2. Marapiane in Dr J.S. Moroka in the Nkangala region 3. Moloto in Tembisile Hani in the Nkangala region 4. Mkhizeville in Mkhondo in the Gert Sibande region 5. Enyibe in Msukalikwa in the Gert Sibande region Limpopo 1. Groblersdal in the Sekhukhune region 2. Seshego in the Capricorn region 3. Mogalakwena in the Waterberg region 4. Shayandima in the Vhembe region 5. Phalaborwa in the Mopani region North West 1. Kagisano and Taung in Dr Ruth Segomotsi Mompati 2. Ramotshere and Ratlou in the Ngaka Modiri Molema region 3. Moses Kotane in the Bojanala region KwaZulu-Natal 1. uMhlabuyalingana in the uMkhanyakude region 2. eDumbe in the Zululand region 3. Utrecht in the Amajuba region 4. Ladysmith in the uThukela region 5. eNquthu in Umzinyathi 6. Umzimkhulu in the Sisonke region 7. Scottsburgh in the Ugu region 8. Maphumulo in the Ilembe region Northern Cape 1. The whole province must be declared a special economic zone with industrial assistance for all companies that create a minimum of 2 000 jobs per investor per area. Western Cape 1. Cape Agulhas in the Overberg region 2. Beaufort West in the Central Karoo region 3. Ashton in the Cape Winelands region 4. Oudtshoorn in the South Cape region 5. Citrusdal in the West Coast region. 16. Under the EFF government, township economy equates to township industrialisation, and special tax-free economic zones will be created in populous townships. 17. The EFF government will declare township areas as special tax-free zones in exchange for 2 000 full-time jobs per investor paying a minimum wage and pension contribution per company. 18. The EFF government will pass legislation that ensures a minimum wage of R4 500 across the board for all full- time workers and will fight that each of the following sectors accordingly receives the stipulated minimum wage: - Mineworkers: R12 500 per month - Farm workers: R5 000 per month - Manufacturing workers: R6 500 per month - Retail workers: R5 000 per month - Builders: R7 000 per month - Petrol attendants: R6 500 per month - Cleaners: R4 500 per month - Domestic workers: R5 000 per month - Private security guards: R7 500 per month - Full-time waiters and waitresses: R4 500 per month. 19. The EFF government will use state procurement as an instrument for driving job creation, meaning that a minimum of 80% of all goods and services procured by the state must be locally produced, and majority-owned and controlled by the people of South Africa. 20. The localisation drive will include all procurement, inclusive of automobiles, electronics, textiles, food and professional services. 21. The EFF government will pass a policy that 100% of the food procured by the state for school feeding schemes, hospitals, prisons, etc. is locally produced by emerging historically excluded farmers, and that a minimum of 50% is procured from women and the youth. 22. The EFF government will put measures in place to ensure that a minimum of 50% of the labour force is unionised and that collective bargaining is prescribed and actively promoted. 23. The EFF government will ensure that a minimum of 50% of all state procurement benefits women and youth- owned and/or controlled companies. 24. The EFF government will guarantee ‘one degree one job’ – The EFF government commits to absorb all unemployed graduates and place them into areas relevant to their qualifications. 25. The EFF government will drive a massive job creation programme by building studios in every municipality for artists to record and produce their work locally. 26. The EFF government will create jobs through local beneficiation. 27. The EFF government will impose a quota of 60% on all shops to sell locally produced goods and products. CORRUPTION 1. The EFF government will increase, harness and enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of governance institutions to pre-empt all forms of corruption. 2. The EFF government will abolish the usage of private companies to fulfil functions and duties that government should fulfil. 3. The EFF government will ban the usage of consultants and project management units as a basis for delivering government services. 4. The EFF government will build internal capacity to fulfil its own functions and responsibilities, thereby avoiding being influenced and having its employees bribed by private companies and consultants in the fulfilment of government tasks. 5. The EFF government will establish state administration courts to promptly respond to incidents of corruption with the aim of firing and blacklisting corrupt state employees and private companies and recovering money lost due to corruption. 6. The EFF government will introduce a minimum sentence of 20 years for all public representatives and servants convicted of corruption. 7. The EFF government will protect the independence of the Public Protector, the Auditor General and all other corruption monitoring institutions to independently oversee government programmes. 8. The EFF government will introduce legislation preventing all public representatives and public servants from doing any form of business with public institutions. 9. The EFF will pass a law that will make all Public Representatives and Servants to forfeit their pension funds and savings if they are found guilty of corruption. 10. The EFF government will reduce and eventually ban the use of consultants and project management units as a basis for delivering government services. 11. The EFF government will strengthen the current legislation aimed at the protection of whistle-blowers. 12. The Eff government will introduce new legislation 13. The EFF government will introduce new legislation and other measures for: a. compulsory imprisonment plus community service during and beyond the term of imprisonment to pay back to society any money gained through corruption and send a clear message that corruption does not pay; b. corrupt offenders employed in the public sector to forfeit their pensions and other benefits; and c. Corrupt offenders to receive lifetime bans from employment in the public sector. 14. The EFF government will act decisively on private sector corruption. 15. The EFF government will amend the Constitution to make the National Prosecution Authority (NPA) a constitutional institution accountable to Parliament to guarantee its independence in the fight against corruption and crime in general. GENDER, WOMEN AND LGBTQI 1. Women have suffered most from the neo-liberal reality of the past 20 years. The vicious circle of triple oppression, based on race, class and gender, has not been broken for black women in particular. The EFF recognises that while patriarchy and sexism are pervasive in our society, it is black women who suffer the most from gender-based violence. Up to now, interventions for dealing with violence against women have been superficial, half-hearted and based on the wrong understanding of the root causes for the vulnerability of women. 2. The EFF government will strive to realise women's liberation through a variety of interventions, starting with prioritising women when it comes to the benefits of economic emancipation. These interventions will include education against patriarchy and sexism, complemented by legislation to protect and promote women’s liberation and the close monitoring of the implementation thereof in order to realise real women empowerment in society, within the family and at the workplace. 3. The EFF believes that gender-based violence and related antisocial activities are reinforced and even sustained by the deplorable general conditions of our people; therefore, a key to female emancipation is the emancipation of all. The EFF will emphasise transforming the lives of our people in the ghettos from one of generalised structural violence as a mechanism to end all violence, including violence against women. 4. The EFF government will ensure that the following key interventions are made: - 50% women representation in all spheres representing economic benefit, political participation, a managerial and leadership responsibility; - Compulsory gender education and training for all (e.g. at school, work, within the family, church, in the legislative, executive as well as civil society); - Education of the police on gender justice and the establishment of specialised law enforcement units to deal with women-related crimes; - Strengthening of education of men on patriarchy, sexism and misogyny; and - Engaging custodians of tradition, faith leaders and other cultural practitioners to collectively find means to combat the oppression of women. 5. The EFF government will introduce a special inspectorate in the Department of Labour to monitor, report on and enforce gender parity and equality in the workplace. Such measures will range from name-and- shame, heavy penalties to the withdrawal of trading licences in the case of repeat offenders. 6. The EFF government will introduce a whistle-blowing mechanism for reporting all instances of sexual harassment, jobs-for-sex and gender-based violence in the workplace. 7. The EFF government will initiate a comprehensive research project aimed at the recognition of work performed by women in the household as formal labour which contributes to the national economy, GDP and the formal tax system. - LGBTQI 1. The EFF government will aggressively engage in public awareness and communication strategies and training interventions all aimed at or directed towards positively changing social norms which declare LGBTQI sexual preferences as abnormal. 2. The EFF government will amend the Criminal Law Amendment Act and existing legislation to include harsher minimum sentences for ‘corrective’ rape specifically, or crimes committed with hatred as motivation in general. 3. The EFF government will also amend the Sex Description 4. Act and related legislation to ensure the Home Affairs Department expedites ID alteration applications for transgender applicants. 5. The EFF government will invest in a public health care system that ensures easy access to gender-affirming treatment. 6. The EFF government will decisively enforce the Equality Act and related legislation to end unfair discrimination by government and private organisations in relation to the employment of women and the LGBTQI community. 7. The EFF government will amend the Facilities Regulations Act and related regulations to enable the implementation of gender-neutral toilet facilities in schools, public facilities and workplaces to benefit transgender populations and people outside of the gender binary. 8. The EFF government will amend the Child Care Act and related legislation to impose penalties for unfair discrimination against LGBTQI individuals in relation to adoption processes. The second part of the manifesto can be read here: