Unemployment up in KZN as province sheds 128 000 jobs during 4th quarter of 2018 13 February 2019 The Democratic Alliance notes with deep concern the latest statistics on unemployment for KwaZulu-Natal, which show that 128 000 jobs were shed in the province between the 3rd quarter and 4th quarter of 2018. The figures, released yesterday by Stats SA, also reveal that KZN’s unemployment rate has increased quarter on quarter, with the 3rd quarter (July to September 2018) showing a 23% unemployment rate which increased to 25.6% for the 4th quarter (October to December 2018). The increase equates to 128 000 people. The DA is alarmed by these figures which are horrendous in light of the fact that there is little chance of immediate improvement given the province’s already extremely sluggish economy. It is clear that the ANC-led government in KZN cannot keep doing things the same way and expect a different outcome. The DA has long since realized the importance of providing the right environment to attract investment and thereby jobs. This has led to the DA-led Western Cape creating 50% of all new jobs in South Africa - 95 000 out of a total of 188 000 - between the 3rdquarter of 2017 and the 3rd quarter of 2018. In order to do the same for KZN, a DA-led KZN government would urgently; - Get basic service delivery back on track – electricity load shedding is the death knell of investment - Cut the red tape and welcome investors with a red carpet - Ensure policy certainty to encourage small, medium and micro businesses - Allow of a window for development of new business by relaxing current labour laws to encourage expansion - Get rid of crime and grime which are the enemy of business. This will require that every sphere of government from provincial to local, along with law enforcement work as partners rather than the enemies of development. Regrettably, the ANC has been so obsessed with power-mongering and accumulating personal wealth that the priority of job creation has fallen by the wayside. This to the detriment of the people of our province who deserve far greater access to opportunity. As we approach a national election on 8 May, the future of our province and those living within it has never been more precarious. Change is only possible under a clean and caring government - that government is the Democratic Alliance. Issued by Ann McDonnell, DA KZN Spokesperson on Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, 13 February 2019