Deepening centralisation of police management a concern 27 February 2019 Minister of Community Safety, Alan Winde, has raised concerns about deepening centralisation of policing management and functions. This follows Minister Winde’s request to Lieutenant General Jula for an investigation into undue promotions in Western Cape SAPS, which he referred to his Pretoria bosses. Last week Lt Gen Jula responded to Minister Winde, stating: “Kindly be advised that the issues raised in your email is a National competency. The matter has thus been directed to the office of the National Commissioner for the necessary attention.” Minister Winde said the referral of his request to the national Minister has become a trend which is evidence of a management clamp down by national Minister Cele. “It is unacceptable that the head of the police in a Province is disempowered when it comes to investigating allegations on his turf. The Provincial Commissioner should determine who should be promoted and if it is deserved. This makes sense as the provincial commissioner naturally has better knowledge and insight of the candidates that are being considered for promotion. I reiterate that politics should have no place in the police service. As Constitutionally mandated, the police’s focus should be “to prevent, combat and investigate crime, to protect and secure the inhabitants of the Republic, and it should do so without fear or favour.” I am hopeful that this matter will receive the urgent attention it deserves, as we cannot have incompetent, unqualified, inexperienced individuals in leadership positions just because of their political stance. This only increases the pressure on an already under-resourced police service, which is already plagued with infighting among its leadership. With a Provincial police-to-population ratio of 1 officer for every 509 residents, and a ratio of 1:560 in Cape Town, we have to ensure that the actual crime-fighting and resourcing issues are addressed. For us to get close to the national ratio of 1:375, we need a further 4500 officers. Ten people are being murdered a day. Reports say that since the beginning of the year, 17 murders have been committed in Bonteheuwel - since the start of February, 25 murders have been committed in Mitchells Plain. If we are to eradicate crime, we deserve policing that is qualified, experienced, transparent, honest, sincere, well-functioning and competent - a service that has all the required tools and is capacitated fully to be efficient in its work – a service that has a trustworthy relationship with the communities it serves. The local authority is best placed to ensure this and this is why I will fight for the decentralisation of the police service. Issued by Marcellino Martin, Spokesperson for Minister Alan Winde, 27 February 2019