The Department of Correctional Services moves to secure continuity of food services The Department of Correctional Services (DCS) has noted the announcement by the two major South African banks, FNB and ABSA, that they will be closing the banking accounts belonging to African Global Operations. This has necessitated Correctional Services to embark on a continuity plan to ensure uninterrupted provision of nutrition at correctional centres. DCS has urgently set up a war room, capacitated with work streams captains, working on an in-depth operational plan which will immediately kick in to facilitate a seamless transition in the in the event of any disruption to nutrition services. Any possible interruption of service related to African Global Operations will only be limited to seven (7) management areas out of 46; which translates into 26 correctional centres, housing 46 434 inmates, only 29 per cent of the total inmate population. The war room has activated the emergency response plan, which will mitigate both the identified risks and those that may accidentally emerge.  A security plan has also been activated which will ensure that safety and security is maintained. The Department will be meeting with National Treasury today (18 February 2019) with a view to set up systems to address any challenges that may arise during the transitional phase. It’s worth noting that since the testimony given by the former BOSASA CFO at the Zondo Commission of Enquiry, Correctional Services had already started a review process in relation to all food services contracts.  The Department is at an advanced stage in terms of developing an alternative food services plan.  An audit has been concluded to this effect, looking at, amongst others, the state of the kitchens including infrastructure and equipment (state vs service provider), financial and human resources, systems involved in procuring perishable goods where the Department was not in a position to supply inputs, and the standard operating procedures. What remains critical at this stage is to ensure that correctional centres continue to operate without disruptions that could be occasioned by the change in the management of nutritional services in our centres, responding directly to the mandate of corrections. Statement issued by Singabakho Nxumalo, Department of Correctional Services, 18 February 2019