City of Joburg created 110 000 jobs – Stats SA I am pleased to note that the City of Johannesburg created 110 000 jobs net year-on-year which has resulted in a 1.1 % decrease in the expanded definition of the unemployment rate. This is according to the Q4 Quarterly Labour Force Survey released by Stats SA earlier today. This is in stark contrast to the 200 000 jobs lost at the hands of the previous administration over their five-year term. Importantly, the City out-performed both the country and Gauteng province. Sadly, South Africa saw a net loss of 132,000 jobs year-on-year, increasing the expanded unemployment rate by 0.7%. Gauteng saw a marginal decrease of 0.1% in the expanded unemployment rate, with a net increase of 92,000 jobs over the same period. The latest jobs statistics for the City show that, steadily, change is coming to the city and more and more businesses and entrepreneurs have confidence in Johannesburg as South Africa’s economic hub. Since coming into office, our multi-party government has worked to introduce a number of new initiatives intended to stimulate Joburg’s economy and, in the process, kick-start a sustained period of growth that will lead to jobs. These include the roll out of Opportunity Centres, which will assist budding entrepreneurs with crucial skills and support for growing their businesses so that they in turn can create job opportunities. Most recently, we have commenced with the revitalisation of the Inner City another intervention through which we hope to create more jobs for our residents. Currently, a total of 84 properties for mixed-use development have been released by the City. Earlier this year, we announced the commencement of development set to begin at 3 of these properties with more soon to follow. By attracting investment from property developers and, in turn, turning our inner-city into a construction site, as has been our mission since this multiparty coalition took over the reins, we will create jobs during as well as post-construction. With the support of business, residents and all other stakeholders, we can kick-start the economy and create jobs for our residents. Issued by Luyanda Mfeka, Director: Mayoral Communications, Office of the Executive Mayor, 12 February 2019