Uncaring ANC knew about terrible conditions at Bopelong Psychiatric Hospital – Premier’s “shock” is wilful ignorance 22 February 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West is taken by surprise at Premier Job Mokgoro’s lack of hands-on knowledge about the huge challenges in this province. The DA will now require a full investigation into the tenders, contracts and the management plan of the Bophelong Psychiatric Hospital in Mafikeng. Mokgoro is quoted in recent media reports that he was “shocked” after he visited the Bophelong Psychiatric Hospital  – as if he were never informed about the terrible state of the facility. We take his sudden concern with a pinch of salt and deem his visit as window dressing prior to the election. This hospital is on his doorstep and this is pure ignorance to deny any knowledge of the problems there. This facility was opened with huge fanfare prior to the 2016 elections and has never been fully operational. The whole project is tainted with corruption and mismanagement. Less than five months ago the DA informed Mokgoro’s government about the poor and inhumane conditions at the hospital after we personally conducted an oversight inspection. Our findings include: - The facility was only partially operational. - The hospital currently only had two wards providing psychiatric treatment to 97 state patients, despite having the capacity to care for 259 patients. - The hospital is functioning on skeleton staff. There is only 1 psychiatrist and 1 doctor treating patients, who are not based at the centre and also have to provide care to the psychiatric patients at the psychiatric unit at the Mafikeng Municipal Hospital. Furthermore, there are just 12 staff members providing care to patients. - Concerned patients complained about the poor and unhygienic conditions they have been subjected to at the hospital. - There is no laundry facility, ventilation in the wards was totally inadequate, there is no hot water in the showers, which back up due to drainage problems, and the urinals were not working properly and leaking. As a result, the stench in the bathrooms was overpowering. - The staff are often assisted by security personnel to deal with psychiatric patients. This is very alarming considering that the security might not have proper training to deal with the needs of psychiatric patients. - Present costs on the hospital exceed R450 million. To date, the hospital has only made provision for state patients referred by the Courts. No provision has been made for the general psychiatric patients. This, despite general psychiatric patient numbers far exceeding those of state committed patients. This means that general psychiatric patients are still referred to the psychiatric unit at the Provincial Hospital. This arrangement highlights the poor planning of the North West Government as well as the already controversial Department of Health. A visit to the Municipal Hospital was equally alarming. The hospital was ghastly. It is in disrepair, filthy and overgrown. Where the DA governs, we prioritise the care of our most vulnerable members of the society. In order to ensure that quality health care service is rendered to all residents should vote against the party that has killed psychiatric patients and vote for change that can only be brought by the DA. Issued by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Premier Candidate, 22 February 2019