This is the second part of the EFF’s 2019 election manifesto. The first part can be read here. - LGBTQI 1. The EFF government will aggressively engage in public awareness and communication strategies and training interventions all aimed at or directed towards positively changing social norms which declare LGBTQI sexual preferences as abnormal. 2. The EFF government will amend the Criminal Law Amendment Act and existing legislation to include harsher minimum sentences for ‘corrective’ rape specifically, or crimes committed with hatred as motivation in general. 3. The EFF government will also amend the Sex Description 4. Act and related legislation to ensure the Home Affairs Department expedites ID alteration applications for transgender applicants. 5. The EFF government will invest in a public health care system that ensures easy access to gender-affirming treatment. 6. The EFF government will decisively enforce the Equality Act and related legislation to end unfair discrimination by government and private organisations in relation to the employment of women and the LGBTQI community. 7. The EFF government will amend the Facilities Regulations Act and related regulations to enable the implementation of gender-neutral toilet facilities in schools, public facilities and workplaces to benefit transgender populations and people outside of the gender binary. 8. The EFF government will amend the Child Care Act and related legislation to impose penalties for unfair discrimination against LGBTQI individuals in relation to adoption processes. - YOUTH DEVELOPMENT 1. Youth development cuts across all aspects of the EFF manifesto, because the jobs the EFF government will create, the businesses that will be financed, the fee-free education that will be provided and the social assistance programme will primarily benefit the youth. 2. The EFF government will mainstream youth development in all sectors of government and pursue active programmes to professionalise youth work. 3. The EFF government will develop mechanisms to monitor the implementation of youth development initiatives. 4. The EFF government will pass legislation that will ensure that all government departments and all public institutions employ a minimum of 40% of people between the ages of 18 and 35. 5. The EFF government will pass legislation that will ensure that all government departments and all public institutions spend 50% of their procurement budget on youth-owned businesses. 6. The EFF government will ensure that all private corporations employ a minimum of 35% of people between the ages of 18 and 35. 7. The EFF government will ensure that all communities have a Youth Information and Advisory Centre which will inform, educate and guide young people on possible career paths and educational opportunities available in South Africa. 8. The EFF government will ensure that a minimum of 40% of budget allocation to government departments in all spheres of government is specifically set aside for youth empowerment and upliftment. 9. Under the EFF government, the NYDA will be autonomous from any direct influence or micro-management by government in an effective, efficient and integrated manner, whilst rallying and advocating support for the implementation of women and youth-driven development strategies. 10. The EFF government will integrate and institutionalise youth development at local government level. 11. The EFF government will build NYDA offices in every municipality. 12. The EFF government will allocate R2 billion to the NYDA, with a minimum of 50% of that allocated to companies, programmes and projects controlled by women. - CRIME 1. The EFF government’s approach to fighting crime will take into consideration that crime is a socio-economic consequence and should be fundamentally uprooted by economically developing our communities and providing criminals with quality jobs and careers. 2. The EFF government will by 2024 establish satellite police stations that will be open 24 hours in a day and seven days in a week in every ward of the country where there currently is no police station. 3. The EFF government will re-open police and satellite police stations in Marabastad, Zandspruit, Kocksoord, Azaadville, Morula Sun, Melville, Zithobeni and Thembelihle in Gauteng by 2022. 4. The EFF government will re-open police and satellite police stations in Siyathemba, Emjindini, Botleng, Tjakastad, Kwazamokuhle, Msogwaba, Daanjie, Hectorspuit, Lebohang, Badfontein, Dundonald, Phola, Thuthukani, Phungutsha and Kamhlushwa in Mpumalanga by 2022. 5. The EFF government will ensure that all police stations are housed in properties owned by the state. 6. The EFF government will ensure that each police station has officers with specialised skills to deal with cases of sexual violence against and abuse of women and children and to support victims. 7. The EFF government will require all police stations to have DNA kits by the end of 2019. 8. The EFF government will retrain all police officers by 2022 so that they are able to process and investigate sexual violence and intimate-partner violence crimes, in a way that takes cognisance of the short-term and long-term mental and physical health of the victim. 9. The EFF government will determine the number of police officers to be allocated to a station in relation to the number of people within the station’s catchment area. 10. The EFF government will employ an additional 100 000 police officers by 2023. 11. The EFF government will repair all broken police vehicles by 2020. 12. The EFF government will purchase an additional 7 000 police vehicles by 2022, on condition that 50% of all parts are made in South Africa. 13. The EFF government will absorb all police reservists and security guards. 14. The EFF government will increase police visibility. 15. The EFF government will impose strict rules on gun ownership and will aggressively recover illegal guns. 16. The EFF government will deploy a special task team to deal with gangsterism and drugs in places such as the Cape Flats in Cape Town, 17. The EFF government will improve the capacity of crime intelligence to include the usage of technology to solve crimes. 18. The EFF government will train additional detectives. 19. The EFF government will re-capacitate Community Policing Forums across the country and encourage the formation of crime watch and street committees in crime hotspot communities and areas 20. The EFF government will give rewards for citizens who submit evidence depicting alleged criminal activities, including drug dealing, social crimes and domestic violence 21. Racism shall be declared a punishable criminal offence 22. As part of its massive drive for rural development, the EFF government will introduce a specialised unit to deal with the problem of stock theft in rural and farming areas 23. Sentences for rhino poaching will be increased 24. The SABC must dedicate one hour per day on all radio and television stations to educate the public about crime prevention and community policing 25. All immigrants shall be registered and have their fingerprints captured by the new Department of Home Affairs and Internal Security. - EDUCATION 1. The EFF government will introduce free decolonised education for all, advancing topics pertaining to indigenous knowledge, sovereignty and economic freedom in the curricula. 2. The EFF government will criminalise all parents who do not take their children to school. EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: 1. The EFF government will make universal provision for early childhood development (ECD) programmes and will make it compulsory for children from the ages of three years and upwards to be enrolled in an ECD for free. 2. The EFF will develop a common ECD curriculum focusing on nutrition programmes, book reading and storytelling, and other land-based activities to enhance children’s understanding of their surrounding environment. 3. Under the EFF government, all ECD practitioners will be employed on a full-time basis, with full pay and pension contribution by government. 4. The EFF government will train an additional 40 000 ECD practitioners by 2021, of whom a minimum of 50% must be women and the youth. BASIC EDUCATION: 5. The EFF government will introduce free decolonised education for all, advancing topics pertaining to indigenous knowledge, sovereignty and economic freedom in the curricula. 6. The EFF government will increase the use of information and communication technology for teaching, with the aim of achieving universal coverage in computer literacy by 2024. 7. Under the EFF, each learner will get a tablet loaded with all necessary study material, tutorials and educational videos. 8. The EFF government will prioritise indigenous ways of teaching, learning and development. 9. ‘One education system, one country’ – Under the EFF government, all students will fall under one school system and all matric learners will write the same examinations. Independent Examination Board (IEB) will be abolished. 10. The EFF will provide scholar transport for all learners who stay more than 2 kilometres from the school. 11. The EFF government will electrify all schools everywhere by 2021. 12. The EFF government will provide two nutritious meals a day to all learners in all schools by 2020. 13. The EFF government will ensure that there is clean water in every school by January 2021. 14. The EFF government will provide security in all schools. 15. The EFF government will encourage all learners to do mathematics. 16. Under the EFF government, all schools will have remedial teachers. 17. The EFF government will ensure that there are safe flushing toilets in all schools by 2021. 18. The EFF government will build new schools with technology integration in the classroom, sports facilities and computer labs to reduce the teacher-to-pupil ratio to 1:40 for primary schools and 1:30 for secondary schools. 19. The following areas will be prioritised for the building of new schools: Eastern Cape 1. Matatiele ward 8: Belfort 2. Mbizana ward 18: Sigidi 3. Dimbaza ward 36: Mzintshane 4. Mdantsane ward 11: Langelitsha, ward 46: Cover Ridge Primary, ward 31: Qonce High, ward 39: Rayi Primary 5. Dzluxolo SS ward 1: Elundini 6. Mhlontlo ward 16: Mthintwa 7. PSJ ward 5: Caguba High School Free State 1. Jagersfontein 2. Koffiefontein 3. Botshabelo (Extension 1) 4. Reitz 5. Marquard 6. Vrede Gauteng 1. Ward 17 Sebokeng, Emfuleni in Extension 28 2. Ward 1 Ekurhuleni, Clayville Extension 45 3. Between wards 4 and 5 Mogale West Rand – Kagiso 4. Between wards 1 and 2 Merafong Municipality 5. Ward 127 Mathole Roodepoort – Johannesburg Kwa Zulu-Natal 1. Emladlangegeni (Mange Area) 2. Mtubatuba (KwaMsane Township) 3. Ubuhlebezwee 4. Ray Nkonyane 5. uMsinga Limpopo 1. Nkomo village (Giyani) 2. Mavalane village (Giyani) 3. Biko village (Lulekane township) 4. Boelane Maseke village (Namakgale) 5. Phalama village (Thulamela)) Mpumalanga 1. Mshadza in Masoyi Mbombela 2. Langeloop and Bosfontein in Nkomazi 3. Allandale in Bushbuck Ridge 4. Mametlake 5. Nokaneng 6. Lefisoane Northern Cape 1. Duplooysburg and Olierivier primary schools and secondary school 2. Richmond 3. Gamobedi 4. Gasehubane 5. Garuele Siyanda primary school 6. Ikaganeng North West 1. Blydeville 2. Boskuil 3. Vaal Reefs 4. Marikana 5. Ipelegeng Western Cape 1. De Doorns 2. Rawsonville 3. Op die Berg 4. Kayamandi 5. Enaknini 20. The EFF government will ensure that all learning and teaching support materials are delivered in September the year preceding a new school year and will publish a report in November of every year on the delivery of learner-teacher support materials. 21. The EFF government will launch a yearlong #TeachersMatter campaign, starting in 2020, to look at both the professional and personal needs of teachers, including training in soft skills, emotional wellness, financial literacy, assistance with debt management etc. 22. The EFF will build high-technology teacher training colleges to equip educators of the future with adequate technological skills to impart to learners. 23. The EFF government will introduce peer review evaluation for teachers that focuses on development. 24. The EFF government will launch a #ReturnToSchool campaign in 2020 for all people who have dropped out of school, including domestic workers, sex workers and girls who have left school. 25. The EFF government will employ at least two physical education trainers in each school by 2022. 26. The EFF government will build two grass fields, two pitches and a swimming pool at every school by 2023. 27. The EFF government will appoint two social workers per school by the end of 2021. 28. The EFF government will appoint one nurse per school by 2021. 29. The EFF government will appoint one orthodontist per school by 2023. 30. The EFF government will make it compulsory for every school to have a vegetable garden by 2020. 31. The EFF government will employ one arts and culture teacher per grade in each school by 2022. 32. The EFF government will build computer labs, equipped with internet connectivity, by 2022. 33. The EFF government will build a library in all schools without libraries by 2022. 34. The EFF government will incorporate in the curriculum career guidance as a mandatory subject for all high school learners. 35. The EFF will build new special schools by 2021 with technology integration in the classroom, sports facilities and computer labs. 36. The EFF government will introduce modules about different disabilities and practical lessons on inclusion. 37. The EFF government will provide safe and accessible transport for children with disabilities. 38. The EFF government will provide mobility, technological and human aids for all pupils with disabilities. 39. The EFF government will provide sanitary towels to all learners in public schools immediately. 40. The EFF government will introduce vernacular languages as the foundation of the education system in all provinces. 41. The EFF government will introduce driving schools for all learners, including a subsidy for booking leaner’s and driver’s license tests. 42. The EFF government will launch a countrywide literacy campaign to equip all citizens with the basic skills to read, write and count so as to enable them to become more knowledgeable about all aspects of their lives and increase the literacy rate to 98% by 2024. 43. The EFF government will abolish the 30% pass mark and increase it to 50% and ensure that all learners who enter the school system are accounted for by the 12th year of writing matric. 44. The EFF government will introduce basic sign language lessons to be taught to all learners. 45. The EFF will introduce comprehensive Adult Education programmes and guarantee educational access by adults who could not finish school for one reason or another. HIGHER EDUCATION: 46. The EFF government will introduce free decolonised education for all, advancing issues of indigenous knowledge, sovereignty and economic freedom in education. 47. The EFF government will increase the use of information and communication technology for teaching. 48. The EFF will pass a law that will zero-rate all Educational Apps and content in all gadgets, such as computers, laptops, tablets, and phones. 49. The EFF government will make it compulsory for all learners to pursue post-secondary education and training at universities, universities of technology and TVET colleges. This will be made possible through state assistance and massive expansion of vocational training and education. 50. The EFF government will cancel all student debt, re-integrate all students who were excluded on the basis of fees and give certificates, diplomas and degrees to all students who passed and were denied their qualifications because of outstanding fees. 51. The EFF government will establish a centralised higher education registration system so that students are not required to fill in their details and register more than once. 52. The EFF government will provide free higher education until a first degree for all and will provide scholarships, including scholarships to study at overseas universities for postgraduate qualifications. 53. The EFF government will provide free accommodation for students at institutions of higher learning and will quadruple the number of rooms available by 2023. 54. The EFF government will provide two warm meals per day to each student at institutions of higher learning by 2020. 55. The EFF government will allow all students to travel for free on public transport, provided they carry their student card, by 2023. 56. The EFF government will place a price cap on food sold at all institutions of higher learning by 2019. 57. The EFF government will establish a free 24hours/7days clinic at each institution of higher learning by 2022. 58. The EFF government will provide free learning materials at all institutions of higher learning by 2021. 59. The EFF government will require each institution of higher learning to have a counsellor for every 1 000 students by 2023. 60. The EFF government will make all institutions of higher learning differently-abled friendly by 2020. 61. The EFF government will introduce free driving schools at all institutions of higher learning by 2020. 62. The EFF government will require each campus to insource all staff by the end of 2019. 63. The EFF government will require each campus to have campus security by 2020, with a sexual crimes unit, more than 70% of employees of which must be female. 64. The EFF government will provide free sanitary towels at all institutions of higher learning immediately. 65. The EFF government will provide each student residing off campus with three gigabytes of data per month by 2021. 66. The EFF government will increase the intake at institutions of higher learning at both universities and TVETs by 20% annually. 67. The EFF government will synchronise the goals and needs of the economy with the number of places available at each institution of higher learning. 68. The EFF government will connect all institutions of higher learning to high-speed fibre networks by 2023. 69. The EFF government will provide each student with a laptop by 2024. 70. The EFF government will fast-track the digitalisation of institutions of higher learning according to annual targets. 71. The EFF government will re-open all nursing colleges that have been closed and will open five new nursing colleges by 2023. 72. The EFF government will re-open all teacher training colleges that have been closed and will open five new teacher training colleges by 2023. 73. The EFF government will require all institutions of higher learning to provide learning materials in the three most spoken languages where the institutions are located by 2024. 74. The EFF government will require all institutions of higher learning to teach 50% of all courses in a South African language besides English and Afrikaans by 2024. 75. The EFF government will require 10% of all academic publications in the country to be written in a South African language besides English and Afrikaans by 2024. 76. The EFF government will require each university to offer Swahili Studies as a degree by 2024. 77. The EFF government will establish a digital library which will buy the rights to every academic publication that has ever been published so that all students can access them free of charge. 78. The EFF government will require each university in the country to offer degrees and courses in coding, computer hardware development, artificial intelligence, robotics, the internet and biotechnology by 2022. 79. The EFF government will require each TVET to offer courses focused on computer hardware and coding by 2022. 80. The EFF government will provide scholarships to students to study abroad, specifically focusing on degrees and courses which are not provided in South Africa or that are of strategic importance or relate to national security. 81. The EFF government will require each medical school in the country to provide courses in traditional medicine by 2023. 82. The EFF government will establish an agency to place each final-year student in an internship programme by 2023. 83. The EFF government will establish a satellite campus of the University of Witwatersrand’s School of Mining Engineering in Rustenburg by 2022 which will focus on mining and mineral beneficiation. 84. The EFF government will establish a satellite campus of the University of Limpopo’s School of Physical and Mineral Sciences in Phalaborwa by 2022 which will focus on mining and mineral beneficiation. 85. The EFF government will establish a satellite campus of the University of Pretoria’s Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences in Ehlanzeni by 2022 which will focus on agriculture and agro-processing. 86. The EFF government will establish a satellite campus of the University of Free State’s Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences in Thabo Mofutsanyana District Municipality by 2022 which will focus on agriculture and agro-processing. 87. The EFF government will establish a satellite campus of the University of the North-West’s School of Agricultural Sciences in Dr Kenneth Kaunda District Municipality by 2022 which will focus on agriculture and agro-processing. 88. The EFF government will establish a satellite campus of the University of Cape Town’s Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment in ZF Magcawu District Municipality by 2022 which will focus on renewable energy. 89. The EFF government will establish a satellite campus of the University of Johannesburg’s Department of Mining and Mine Surveying in Sekhukhune District Municipality which will focus on mining and mineral beneficiation. 90. The EFF government will pay a once-off grant of R1 million to all black graduates pursuing doctoral studies at accredited institutions, including overseas students, by 2024. 91. The EFF government will introduce a scholarship for people with disabilities to incentivise doctoral studies among them. 92. The EFF government will build one medical training school per province. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTIONS: 93. The EFF government will triple the amount of research funding available by 2024. 94. The EFF government will improve the remuneration and working conditions of lecturers and professors and encourage them to continue with teaching and research and not take up administrative posts in private or public institutions. 95. The EFF government will heavily invest in research and development and will heavily invest in and subsidise technological and scientific innovations and discoveries. 96. The EFF government will support and subsidise technological innovation which leads to the development and manufacturing of a South African automobile (car), computer, tablet, phone and other world-class technological innovations. 97. The EFF government will build a specialist technology university or institute whose primary focus will be technological innovation. 98. The EFF government will use existing capacity to provide high-speed and quality broadband to all schools and institutions of higher learning in South Africa. 99. The EFF government will allocate more funding to conduct research on HIV/Aids, TB and diabetes. - HEALTH 1. The EFF government will focus on primary health with a commitment to attain universal health coverage, with the intention of decreasing infant mortality rates and increase the life expectancy of all people in South Africa. 2. The EFF government will adopt a national health care system that focuses on primary health care, quality clinics and disease profiling through public health care facilities. 3. The EFF government will implement an immunisation and vaccination programme which will cover 100% of all South Africans by 2024. 4. The EFF government’s approach to health care will be based on the pillars of a) prevention, b) promotion and c) education on health care. 5. The EFF will regularise and fully integrate Community Healthcare Workers as full employees of the State who will be responsible for provision of quality healthcare in each and every community. 6. The EFF government will regularly send doctors and other health practitioners to schools, communities and places of work to test for diseases that can be treated at an early stage, starting in 2020. 7. The EFF government will work with established medical research institutions in Cuba to develop vaccines for identified preventable diseases in South Africa. 8. The EFF government will invest in superior medical research which will explore the usage of cannabis for pharmaceutical and medical purposes. 9. The EFF government will work with the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) and maximally use other forms of mass communication to produce health education content to be aired on all SABC radio and television stations and disseminated using all relevant platforms. 10. The EFF government will establish a confidential and secured digital database of health profiles for all South Africa citizens by 2021. 11. The EFF government will build 24-hour integrated post-sexual trauma centres in all district hospitals for urgent medical, forensic, psychological and social assistance, directly linked to policing and detective directorates, by 2021. 12. The EFF government will upgrade hospitals such that each district in South Africa has a regional or tertiary hospital with a minimum of 450 beds, open 24 hours a day, with internal medicine, paediatrics, obstetrics, gynaecology and general surgeons, by 2022. 13. The EFF government will build and upgrade hospitals in areas such as: Eastern Cape 1. Mzimvubu 2. Mbizana 3. Ntabankulu Free State 1. Thaba Nchu 2. Wepener 3. Masilonyana Gauteng 1. Orange Farm 2. Ivory Park Kwa Zulu-Natal 1. Manguzi 2. eNquthu 3. uMzimkhulu Limpopo 1. Vhufuli 2. Makhado 3. Modimolle 4. Suswe 5. Botlowka Mpumalanga 1. Barberton 2. Bethal 3. Witbank 4. Acornhoeck Northern Cape 1. Kuruman 2. Springbok 3. Kimberley 4. Postmasburg 5. Hartswater North West 1. Ditsobotla 2. Mogwase 3. Rustenburg 4. Moretele Western Cape 1. Masiphumelele 2. Grabouw 3. Ocean View 4. Gansbaai 14. The EFF government will build specialised hospitals for the following disease categories: tuberculosis, diabetes mellitus, cerebrovascular diseases, heart disease, hypertensive diseases, chronic lower respiratory diseases and ischaemic heart diseases. 15. The EFF government will pay specific attention to autism 16. and build adequate and high level capacity to treat and respond to cases of autism. 17. The EFF government will strive to build at least one clinic 18. per ward in all wards of South Africa and will extend this to one polyclinic per village in wards that are composed of more than one village. 19. The EFF government will make it compulsory for workplaces with more than 1 500 employees to have a properly equipped and staffed in-house health care facility, such as a clinic or hospital, available for free to all employees. 20. All clinics under the EFF government will be open 24 hours 21. a day. 22. The EFF government will appoint qualified people, 23. including medical practitioners, with adequate administrative and managerial experience and competency at all clinics, community-based health care facilities, therapy and rehabilitation centres and hospitals. 24. The EFF government will build consulting rooms for traditional and indigenous health practitioners, traditional healers and traditional herbalists to use for free in all district hospitals by 2021, as a way to incorporate traditional and indigenous health care practices into the primary health care system. 25. The EFF government will establish a fund to support indigenous African health knowledge production by August 2020. 26. The EFF government will massively increase the number of health care practitioners and ensure that they are evenly spread across districts and provinces. 27. The EFF government will increase the number of nurses and doctors in South Africa’s health care system by: I. Establishing at least one health care training facility per province and ensuring that there is no province without a medical school; and II. Sending recruits to train as nurses in countries across the world, including in Cuba, namely 5 000 in 2021, 6 000 in 2022 and 7 000 in 2023. 28. The EFF government will allocate community health care practitioners to all ward-based clinics and polyclinics. 29. The EFF will make sure that all hospitals, clinics, polyclinics and community health care centres have an adequate number of ambulances. 30. Ambulances will be locally produced by investing in ambulance production plants in South Africa. 31. The EFF government’s state-owned health mechanical service workshops and technicians will prioritise all machines and equipment in district hospitals, and all machines and equipment will be in a working condition by the end of 2020. 32. The EFF government will establish shared services administration facilities for clinics in a ratio of one shared services administration facility to 15 clinics, to manage all administrative services such as record keeping, medication management, facilities management, human resources and financial management services. 33. The EFF will replace all machines and equipment older than ten years in all clinics and hospitals by 2022. 34. The EFF government will develop a policy to guide and ensure the provision of school-based primary health care, social work and psychological services. 35. The EFF government will send specialists such as dentists, optometrists and audiologists to all primary schools at least twice a year, starting from 2020. 36. The EFF government will send scarce specialists to all district hospitals on a weekly basis. 37. The EFF government will use ICT in the health care sector for greater efficiency and improved reaction times when dealing with health problems and concerns. 38. The EFF government will build a state-owned pharmaceutical company to ensure the availability of adequate medicine in all health care facilities by 2021. 39. The EFF government will develop an efficient registration process for generic medicines to ensure affordable prices. 40. The EFF government will establish a pharmaceutical industrial zone for investors with protection of investment and security of tenure on state land by 2022 on condition that they work with the state-owned pharmaceutical company and supply medicine and equipment to clinics, hospitals and community health care facilities. 41. The EFF government will build a state-owned health care equipment company to manufacture health care equipment. 42. EFF government will ensure that the health care system and health solutions are non-discriminatory towards sexual and gender minorities and those with varying physical and mental abilities. 43. The EFF government will establish indoor residual spraying teams on a full-time basis in all malaria-infested areas. 44. The EFF government will provide health inspectors with all the basic resources they need to do their job. 45. The EFF government will police, investigate and prosecute all illegal advertisements of medical procedures or organ sales, illegal health facilities and illegal providers of health care. 46. The EFF government will follow the national and international calendars and will produce health material, communication programmes and campaigns that are in line with both priorities and calendars. 47. The EFF government will use evidence-based and scientific knowledge to educate and inform communities and individuals on health issues. 48. The EFF government will establish four specialised health research institutes, namely TB, malaria, HIV/AIDS and cancer institutes. 49. The EFF government will establish medical missions to send medical trainees to African countries to share and learn from each other’s experiences. 50. The EFF government will give all hospitals autonomy to procure goods and services. 51. The EFF government will appoint additional oncologists, especially for hospitals in KwaZulu-Natal. - HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, WATER AND SANITATION ` HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: 1. The EFF government will provide quality, spacious houses to all the people. These houses will be located within sustainable human settlements with basic services such as water, electricity, sanitation, schools, shopping complexes, sports and recreation grounds, and parks. 2. The EFF government will re-zone all informal settlements by 2021. 3. The EFF government will put mechanisms in place to ensure that all public servants have houses. 4. The EFF government will subsidise housing finance for middle-income earners. 5. The EFF government will legislate for the reduction of 20- to 30-year housing loans to a maximum of ten years by 2020. 6. The EFF government will make it illegal for banks to repossess houses from people who have paid off 50% of their bonds and are unable to continue paying their bond instalments due to socioeconomic circumstances, by the end of 2019. 7. The EFF government will make it illegal to use houses as surety for any loans from financial institutions, by 2019. 8. The EFF government will regulate the cost of rent on state-owned land. 9. The EFF government will make it illegal for residents to be evicted from private properties unless a suitable alternative is found for them. 10. The EFF government will ensure that access to a home is made an inalienable right in the Constitution. 11. 12. The EFF government will do away with apartheid spatial planning and expropriate land without compensation closer to inner city centres to build sustainable housing for all. 13. The EFF government will create a housing access coordinating unit that involves national, provincial and local government which will regularly report to the Presidency on progress with housing provision, the elimination of slums and the provision of dignified sanitation. 14. The EFF government will ensure that the state improves the quality and size of low-cost houses through the state housing construction company. 15. The EFF government will ensure that the state regulates housing finance by providing housing finance that does not exceed a period of ten years. 16. The EFF government will guarantee integrated human settlements that will in the real sense be definitive of all settlements led by the state and that will be equipped with guaranteed bulk services such as water provision, electricity, sewerage systems, parks and recreation facilities. 17. The EFF government will ensure that government-built houses meet the standards required to ensure ease of access for people with disabilities. 18. The EFF government will convert unused state buildings into affordable housing for the poor, offering people long-term, secured leaseholds to these buildings. 19. The EFF government will, through the state construction company, build state-owned houses and complexes which will be made available to people on a lease basis for a period of 99 years. WATER: 20. The EFF Government will discontinue private ownership of bulk water infrastructure and will ensure that each and every household, factory, farm, school, and public infrastructure has access to clean water. 21. The following areas will be prioritised for the building of water infrastructure: Eastern Cape 1. Noxolo 2. Mfuleni wothando 3. Qaqawuli 4. Emahlabathini Limpopo 1. Giyani 2. Maleboho 3. Sekgakgapeng 4. Lulekanin North-West 1. Lethabong 2. Thonando 3. Matlosana 4. Boikhutso 5. Tlhakajeng Gauteng 1. Tjovitjo Orange Farm 2. Langaville Kwathema 3. Ikangala Phumekhaya 4. Mooiplas Tshwane 5. Zenzele Westanaria Mpumalanga 1. Moloto, in Thembisile Hani 2. Nokaneng, New Stand 3. Steenbok, Ward 18, Nkomazi Free State 1. Thenezen in Masilonyana 2. Qwaqwa wards 10, 11, 18 and 19 in Maluti a Phofung 3. Matlharantleng in Tswelopele 4. Moipatong in Dihlabeng 5. Baipehing in Metsimaholo Western Cape 1. Enkanini 2. Marikana 3. Kayamandi 4. Groenheuwel 5. Ashton and Robertson informal settlements 22. The EFF government will repair all water treatment centres by 2020. 23. The EFF government will build a new water treatment facility in each province by 2021. 24. The EFF government will employ 10 000 artisans to repair all leaks in the water infrastructure with the aim of reducing the amount of water lost by leaks to 10% of the current rate by 2022. 25. The EFF government will ensure water sustainability for daily and industrial usage by building dams and large-scale water projects with the capacity to sustainably supply South Africa. 26. The EFF government will provide each South African with in-house hot running water by 2024. 27. The EFF government will build storm water drains in every street in South Africa by 2022. SANITATION: 28. The EFF government will eradicate bucket toilets by the end of 2024. 29. The EFF government will provide each South African with in-house sanitation by 2024. 30. The EFF government will connect each house to the sewage system by 2023. 31. The EFF government will ensure that all schools have a flushing toilet by the end of 2021. - PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES 1. The EFF government will introduce policies in both the public and private sectors to impose measurable goals and targets for the recruitment, employment and retention of people with disabilities to promote their economic independence and reduce their dependence on charity and welfare. 2. The EFF government will ensure that each and every public institution such as hospitals, police stations, home affairs offices, labour offices, and social development offices have at least two people who are trained at and understand sign language to cater for people who cannot speak. 3. The EFF government will actively and materially support initiatives to organise and mobilise the disability sector so that it can constantly and integrally communicate its concerns and amplify its voice in society guided by the principle; ‘Nothing about us without us!’ 4. Under the EFF government, the President will assume direct responsibility for the protection of this vulnerable sector and report on progress annually in his/her State of the Nation Address, after consultation with the sector. 5. The EFF government will ensure that all government buildings and facilities such as police stations, hospitals, clinics, schools and universities are accessible to people with disabilities. 6. The EFF government will ensure that the public transport system is accessible to people with disabilities. 7. The EFF government will establish doctoral scholarships for people with disabilities. - TRADITIONAL LEADERS 1. In order to enhance state capacity and in recognition of the reality that the majority of South Africans subscribe to and align themselves with the institution of traditional leadership, the EFF government will give full recognition to the central role of traditional leaders. 2. The EFF firmly believes that the received western notions of democracy must necessarily be aligned with and adapted to the African way of life, culture, traditions, customs and norms. 3. The EFF government will work hand in glove with traditional leaders as well as CONTRALESA on diverse issues that include: · Rural development initiatives aimed at discouraging rural-to-urban migration, · The capacitation of rural-based co-operatives and similar collectivist schemes such as burial societies, · Climate change and the Green Revolution, · The abolition of all cultural practices which promote and tolerate gender discrimination and gender-based violence, · The custodianship and redistribution of land and the holding of a land summit, · Community participation in mining and other economic activities, especially in the North West and Limpopo Provinces, · The elimination of the scourge of deaths at traditional initiation schools, especially in the Eastern Cape Province, - The definition of roles and building co-operation between traditional leaders and democratically elected councillors, - Mass participation in sporting and cultural activities, and - Conducting a comprehensive legislative review, amendment or repeal of relevant and inadequate legislation such as the Traditional Leadership and Governance Frameworks Act 41 of 2003. - ENERGY 1. The EFF government will stabilise energy supply through maximally pursuing mixed energy sources, including safe coal, nuclear energy and renewable energy sources. 2. The EFF government will instruct and assist Eskom to build a massive renewable energy division which will make optimal use of solar, wind and hydro-energy sources while the dependable energy base will remain safe coal and nuclear energy. 3. The EFF government will expand South Africa’s energy sources, ensuring that all energy needed for South Africa, including fuel, is processed in the country. 4. The EFF government will give free electricity up to 200 kWh per household per month to poor households, and all households will have electricity. 5. The EFF government will cancel all contracts with independent power producers and will stop the roll-out of new independent power producers immediately. 6. The EFF government will ensure that all communities have electricity, starting in Lesedisele, Lekoko, Marikana, Tshing, Jouberton, Khuma, Ditsobotla, Kraaipan, Menoto and Tlholakae in North-West; Matlharantlheng, Baipehing, Vrede Ext 4 and Memel in the Free State; and Madelakufa, KwaThema, KwaMkhancwa, Khutsong, Sonderwater, Vuka Setshe, Jabulani and Siyahlala informal settlements, Kromdraai ward 39, Mathumbu section ward 23, Chief Mogale New Section, Prince, Chris Hani, Denver and Sofaya informal settlements, Lethlabong ward 36, Sobukweville ward 21, Ndlozi, Slovo, Soutpan Marikana, Mavuso and Mountain View informal settlements, Phomolong and Sizanani in Gauteng. 7. The EFF government will establish an independent state electricity economic research institute to prioritise research on energy security and support more than 100 years of energy infrastructure planning, which will report to Parliament. 8. The EFF government will scrap all historical electricity debt, including municipal debt, owed to Eskom. 9. The EFF government will clear all illegal connections and launch an electricity safety campaign in June 2020. 10. The EFF government will scrap all preferential tariff deals that give smelting companies owned by BHP Billiton electricity at below cost by January 2020. 11. The EFF government, through Eskom, will invest heavily in renewable energy sources, including windmills, solar water heaters and all forms of renewable energy, to ensure a good mix of sources of energy and energy security for the country. 12. The EFF government will cancel all indexed fixed-price and cost-plus contracts with immediate effect and furthermore will cancel all mining rights issued to companies mining coal mines that belong to Eskom. 13. The EFF government will compile a comprehensive register of all assets that belong to coal mines, including coal reserves, and it will be published publicly. 14. A state-owned mining company will take over the operations of all coal mines owned by Eskom. This company will prioritise the supply of quality coal at an affordable price to Eskom to lower the overall price of electricity. A state-owned mining company will export surplus coal and will prioritise exports to African countries to support the electrification and industrialisation of the continent. 15. The EFF government will build rail infrastructure in and around its power plants and coal mines to facilitate access to its power plants, coal mines and infrastructure. 16. The EFF government will work towards enlarging Eskom’s capacity so that Eskom is able to distribute electricity to all users in South Africa. 17. The EFF government will utilise Eskom’s capacity to build a nuclear power station. 18. The EFF government will specifically discontinue private ownership of Sasol and Mittal Steel and provide them with concrete developmental mandates to contribute to the rapid sustainable industrial development of South Africa. The third part of the EFF 2019 election manifesto can be read here. 