Does R500k ‘donated’ to Ramaphosa buy Watson immunity from prosecution? 6 February 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) welcomes reports that the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (the “Hawks”) have arrested a number of suspects in connection with the Bosasa corruption scandal. This is indeed a positive development following damning and detailed testimony at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into State Capture in recent weeks which implicated former and current Bosasa executives, senior government officials and top ANC leadership in acts of bribery, money laundering, fraud, and corruption. We are, however, perplexed by reports that Bosasa CEO, Gavin Watson, is not among those arrested, despite most of the testimony at the Zondo Commission placing him at the centre of the scheme. It begs the question: has the R500 000 Watson gave Cyril Ramaphosa to support his campaign to become ANC president and, ultimately, the president of South Africa bought him immunity from prosecution? It also raises questions about the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, who was implicated by witness testimony at the Zondo Commission on 31 January. After all, the Hawks report to Cele. Testifying under oath, former Bosasa employee, Richard le Roux, revealed that he was instructed, on numerous occasions, by Gavin Watson and former Bosasa COO Angelo Agrizzi, to delete security footage captured at Bosasa offices. Le Roux testified that, on one such occasion, he saw and deleted footage of former president Jacob Zuma, accompanied by Cele and Dudu Myeni. This follows marathon testimony by Agrizzi which described Zuma and Myeni’s relationship with Bosasa and detailed alleged cash payments and gifts. It is worth remembering that Cele was appointed Minister of Police by Cyril Ramaphosa on 27 February 2018. His elevation to Cabinet came six years after he was fired as National Police Commissioner amid another corruption scandal. It is gratifying to know that some of those who participated in the State Capture project are finally being arrested. However, our enthusiasm is tempered by the National Prosecuting Authority’s recent decision to withdraw charges against Duduzane Zuma and their similarly botched prosecution of Gupta-linked suspects Varun Gupta, Ashu Chawla and others for their alleged part in the Estina Dairy Project scam. The time has arrived for South Africa’s law enforcement agencies to show that they are finally free from political interference and are able to pursue those responsible for State Capture, without fear or favour. Until such time there will only be One party can bring the change South Africa needs and build a corruption-free One South Africa For All. Issued by Natasha Mazzone, DA Spokesperson on State Capture, 6 February 2019