#AgencyLeaders2018: Women of the Year by Herman Manson. Today we reveal, as part of our annual Agency Leaders poll, our women of the year, as voted for by South Africa's leading agency executives — a brand-new category. Below are the rest of the South African results from last week. - The one to watch in South Africa in 2019!- Agency diversity & transformation SA- Most admired ad agency in South Africa- Most admired ad agency boss in South Africa By Invitation Only: The future of advertising cannabisby Meaghan Essel. The legalisation of cannabis is starting to snowball, which will bring us new clients, along with a range of products and services. So how are we going to sell these? The Suit: Being indispensableby Jason Harrison. Being promoting is about everything you do that is NOT inside a box and that depends on just one word: indispensable. Back2Basics: Four drivers of positive professional brand perceptionsby Mark Eardley. It is the task of marketing to shape positive brand perceptions that will trigger engagements.  Regular Reads: - Media Design: Economist, MA, NYT Mag, Ubisoft — Stories, ZigZag- SA TV Ratings: e.tv — primetime top 20 for Jan 2019- Market Research Wrap: The fluid nature of SA youth On the Radar: - Johnson replaces Miller as Riverbed ECD- SA makes WARC's top 10 most-creative countries- Ogilvy launches Social.Lab SA- Hoorah Digital acquires storytelling agency- Vrye Weekblad back as digital paper Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headlines; The Interlocker, our new monthly comms-focused mailer; and/or Brands & Branding, coming soon! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.