Shortlisted candidates for Judicial Positions 11 February 2019 On 31 October 2018 the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) published notices in the media calling for nominations of interested persons to fill 11 vacancies in the various superior courts. The closing date for submission of nominations was set for 03 December 2018. On 28 January 2019, the Screening Committee of the JSC met and compiled a short list of candidates to be interviewed at its April sitting, scheduled for 01-05 April 2019. On 02 February 2019, the President of the Republic of South Africa informed the Chief Justice and Chairperson of the JSC that he has, acting in accordance with the provisions of section 174(3) of the Constitution, nominated Justice Xola Mlungisi Petse as a candidate to be considered for the vacant position of Deputy President of the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA). The President thus seeks the views of the JSC on the suitability or otherwise of Justice Petse for the position of Deputy President of the SCA. The Chief Justice has responded to the President indicating that the JSC will interview Justice Petse at its April sitting, whereafter provide the President with its views. The names of the candidates to be interviewed by the JSC at its April 2019 sitting are as follows: 1.    Constitutional Court (Two vacancies) Judge Annali Christelle Basson Judge Patricia Lynette Goliath Judge Narandran Jody Kollapen Judge Fayeeza Kathree-Setiloane Judge Stevan Arnold Majiedt Judge Zukisa Laura Lumka Tshiqi 2.    Supreme Court of Appeal (Deputy President) (One vacancy) Judge Xola Mlungisi Petse 3.    Supreme Court of Appeal (Five vacancies) Judge Daniel Vuminkosi Dlodlo Judge Trevor Richard Gorven Judge Caroline Elizabeth Heaton Nicholls Judge Yvonne Thokozile Mbatha Judge Pieter Andries Meyer Judge Fikile Eunice Mokgohloa Judge Selewe Peter Mothle Judge Clive Michael Plasket Judge Owen Lloyd Rogers 4.    Eastern Cape Division of the High Court (Grahamstown) (One vacancy) Ms Feziwe Yolanda Renqe Ms Onica Van Papendorp 5.    Electoral Court (One vacancy) No candidates were shortlisted 6.    Labour and Labour Appeal Court (Deputy Judge President) (One vacancy) Judge Edwin Mogomotsi Molahlehi Judge Andrè Johann Van Niekerk 7.    Northern Cape Division of the High Court (Deputy Judge President) (One vacancy) Judge Bulelwa Myra Pakati Judge Mmathebe Violet Phatshoane In total, the JSC will interview 22 candidates. The shortlisted candidates will be notified of the date, time and venue of the interviews in due course. Law bodies and members of the public wishing to comment on the suitability or otherwise of these candidates should address their comments to the Secretariat of the Judicial Service Commission at Chiloane@concourt.org.za and TPhaahlamohlaka@judiciary.org.za, Cc: JSC@judiciary.org.za. Comments must reach the Secretariat by no later than 08 March 2019. Issued by CP Fourie on behalf of the Judicial Service Commission, 11 February 2019