UCT notes open letter on the CCWG The University of Cape Town notes an open letter penned on the work of the Curriculum Change Working Group (CCWG) by an organisation aligned to one of our student societies. UCT further notes that the organisation, Progress SA, is in partnership with Students for Liberty. All registered student structures should be aware of and can utilise the existing formal platforms of engagement that are in place at UCT and student bodies are encouraged to do so. The Curriculum Change Framework was released in June 2018, before the current Vice-Chancellor to whom the open letter is addressed took office. This is an institutional report following work done by the CCWG. It is not appropriate to link the Vice-Chancellor to this. The executive issued a campus communication on this framework, explaining how it was conceptualised and what it was intended for. In August 2016, the executive informed the campus community of the CCWG’s initiative to address transformation and decolonisation in the curriculum. The role of the CCWG was to facilitate dialogue across the university over a period of 18 months in order to shape strategies for meaningful curriculum change. CCWG engagements included discussions and debates on decolonisation, the role of the public university, pedagogical and assessment practices that are experienced as exclusionary, flexible learning pathways to ensure student success and retention, understandings of the curriculum and its relationship to institutional culture, and the use of the wide range of linguistic, cultural and experiential resources that students and staff bring to the classroom. When the framework was publicly released last year, the executive urged members of the campus community to interrogate, critique and comment on the framework in an inclusive and transparent process. The open letter in question is an example of the kind of feedback that the executive hoped the framework would stimulate. It will therefore be forwarded to the Senate Teaching & Learning Committee as part of the formal process underway. The Teaching and Learning Committee is now working on taking the comments, with a view of integrating different aspects of a curricular review. The aim is to have a document for Senate in the second semester, having been presented and fully discussed in the faculties first. UCT is committed to academic freedom and freedom of expression and regards these rights as fundamental to its institutional culture. Statement issued by Elijah Moholola, UCT Communication and Marketing Department, 22 February 2019