ANC STATEMENT ON NATIONAL WORKING COMMITTEE OUTCOMES The National Working Committee (NWC) of the African National Congress met on Monday, 25 February 2019 and deliberated on a variety of issues of importance to the ANC. The NWC congratulated President Cyril Ramaphosa on his election as the African Union Chairperson in 2020. This is a demonstration of the confidence the AU member countries have in South Africa, and we have no doubt that President Ramaphosa will provide decisive leadership in advancing the objectives of the AU. The NWC welcomed the interventions of the Rapid Response Team on the North-West and further resolved to deploy Cdes Amos Masondo and Hope Papo to reinforce the newly-appointed Provincial Task Team. The NWC noted serious allegations of impropriety which have been levelled against Cde Pule Mabe and Cde Zizi Kodwa. The ANC has therefore accepted their request to voluntarily step aside while dealing with the matters. Cde Pule and Cde Zizi have voluntarily elected to stand down as Spokesperson until these allegations have been tested, but they will remain members of the National Executive Committee (NEC). Cde Dakota Legoete will continue acting as the national spokesperson on the ANC. Gender-based violence is an endemic problem in our society which should not be reduced to individual leaders. The ANC is committed to fighting gender-based violence wherever it occurs and takes allegations against any person with the seriousness it deserves. The NWC considered the state of readiness for the forthcoming elections, noting that only seventy days are left before the election day on 8 May 2019. All members, leaders of the ANC and Alliance partners and volunteers will be on the ground across the country, working tirelessly for a landslide victory at the polls. We are encouraged that South African remain confident that the ANC is the only party that has the capacity to grow South Africa and realise the vision of a better life for all. The ANC met with black professionals on Monday, 25 February 2019. The meeting agreed that each sector will delegate a person to work with NEC's Economic Transformation Committee on transformation issues. A joint briefing on the outcomes of our engagements will be communicated in due course. The NWC considered the developments in Venezuela. As a result, the ANC and its Al iance partners affirmed their solidarity with the people of Venezuela in finding a political solution to the benefit of all the people of Venezuela. A Tripartite Alliance delegation led by the Secretary-General will soon be visiting Venezuela on a fact-finding mission. The ANC sends its condolences to friends and families of those who lost their lives on the road crash on Moloto road in Mpumalanga. We call on government to speed up and conclude interventions aimed at putting an end to the carnage on this road. Statement issued by the African National Congress, 26 February 2019