SACP pledges its solidarity with the people of Zimbabwe, calls for assistance to Zimbabwe 5 February 2019 The South African Communist Party expresses its solidarity with the people of Zimbabwe as a whole, and the suffering masses who have recently been the recipients of violence, while in fact the main problem is the capitalist systemic crisis which started decades ago. The crisis has now reached a point synonymous with a situation of near economic collapse. Pointing fingers, motivated by paranoia, without acknowledging the systemic and historical nature of the problem, as well as the internal weaknesses that found traction after independence, is not a solution but forms part and parcel of the core problem at the political level. The SACP is particularly concerned by the attack on the trade union movement and all unjust arrests. Among others, the President of the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions Peter Mutasa and Secretary-General Japhet Moyo, and the President of the Amalgamated Rural Teachers’ Union of Zimbabwe Obert Masaraure and Secretary-General Robson Chere were arrested. The Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu) has called a solidarity demonstration on Wednesday, 6 February 2019. The action will be held at the Beitbridge Boarder Gate, Musina in the Province of Limpopo, South Africa, starting at 9am. The SACP fully appreciates the decision by our ally, Cosatu, to call for this trade union international solidarity action in line with the federation’s principle – “An injury to one is an injury to all”. The SACP respects the national sovereignty of Zimbabwe, and calls on the people and government of Zimbabwe to find a peaceful resolution of the underlying economic and consequent political and broader social problems. The SACP further calls on the Southern African Development Community, SADC, to assist Zimbabwe, and on the South African government to work within the framework of SADC and through bilateral relations with Zimbabwe to facilitate its assistance. Issued by Alex Mohubetswane Mashilo, National Spokesperson & Head of Communications, SACP, 6 February 2019