Public Service Commission nepotism probe finds Faith Muthambi broke the rules 19 February 2019 Former Public Service and Administration Minister Faith Muthambi has been found “to have failed to adhere to regulatory prescripts” by the Public Service Commission (PSC) for possible abuse of office when she had expanded her private office to 40 people, some of whom included family and friends. The findings follow a request by the Democratic Alliance (DA) on 2 February 2018, to the PSC for an investigation into the hiring practices and composition of the former minister’s private office. While we welcome these findings, we will be writing to the current Minister Ayanda Dlodlo to request that the PSC report into these findings are made public. It is rather peculiar that the contents of the report were shared only with the President and the Minister of Public Service and Administration and not with the DA - who requested the investigation. The DA has been provided only with a letter which presents the findings in vague terms. The DA will not stand for this report to gather dust on President Cyril Ramaphosa or Minister Dlodlo’s desks. The fact that Faith Muthambi is no longer a minister does not absolve her from accountability. In fact, she still remains an ANC Member of Parliament and must be held to account. The fact that Muthambi, despite all the corruption allegations leveled against her,  is still an ANC Member of Parliament speaks to the caliber of leaders in the ANC ranks. The failing ANC never holds its public office bearers accountable for wrongdoing, but rather reward them with key positions in government and parastatals. Contrary to the ANC the DA is no such party. We take the hard, often unpopular decisions of holding government official accountable. Now, more than ever, it has become clear that good governance will never be achieved by the ANC. The DA is the only party that is committed to take up the important task of building One South Africa for All. Issued by Desiree Van Der Walt, DA Shadow Minister of Public Service & Administration, 19 February 2019