Public Protector report on FS Zuma gala dinner proves cadre policy continues to conflate party and state 27 February 2019 In a report on another Free State investigation involving the use of state resources for ANC purposes, the Public Protector (PP) has indicated that this is unlawful, improper and contrary to legislation. This again proves that the ANC’s cadre policy continues to conflate party and state. The PP report can be read here. On 19 October 2016 the DA requested the PP to investigate the fact that the former head of the Department of Police, Roads and Transport in the Free State, Mr S.J. Msibi wrote to businesses requesting them to sponsor tables at an ANC gala dinner at R40 000 per table using an official departmental letterhead. The guest speaker at the gala dinner was former President Jacob Zuma. The DA submitted proof of three letters written to Molpro Construction (Pty) Ltd, Rantoa Service Providers and VNA Consulting requesting such donations signed by Msibi. These companies all provide services to either the Free State provincial government or municipalities. VNA Consulting is also named in the controversial Vogelfontein housing project at Bethlehem that include allegations of political interference and the involvement of the daughter of Ace Magashule in a R150 million tender. The PP indicated that disciplinary action against Msibi is not possible due to his death, but that the evidence presented by the DA suggests that he acted “unlawfully, improperly and contrary to legislative prescripts”. Msibi was a product of the ANC’s cadre deployment policy and a close confidant of former Premier Ace Magashule. Msibi’s funeral was marred by an announcement by Magashule at the event that he had been poisoned. Magashule further indicated that, as result of the poisoning, he had requested Jacob Zuma to send Msibi to Russia for treatment. The PP findings prove that the ANC’s cadre policy is not implemented to benefit the people of the Free State, but rather financially benefit a faction within the ANC through improper and unlawful behaviour. Magashule’s cadres are appointed to promote party political interests above those of the province and country. Most of Magashule’s cadres remain in place within the political and administrative structures in the provincial government and continue to serve his factional interests, even though his new base is in Luthuli House The same factionalist cadre deployment strategy that allowed Magashule to capture the Free State as Premier and to support Jacob Zuma, is in all probability now being directed at national level towards a Magashule presidency at the cost the Cyril Ramaphosa faction. Issued by Roy Jankielsohn, DA MPL and Leader of the Opposition in the Free State Legislature, 27 February 2019