DA to lay criminal charges against Eskom billboard vandals The Democratic Alliance (DA) notes the vandalisation of the Party’s billboard, which read “The ANC has killed the lights affecting 57 million South Africans! Time for us to take their power.” While we do not know who the perpetrators are at this point, we do know that this is not the first time one of our billboards depicting the ANC’s failures have been destroyed. We will not be deterred by this blatant act of sabotage. We will fix our billboard and we will proceed to lay criminal charges today at 14:30 at the Parkview Police Station, 71 Dundalk Ave, Parkview, Randburg, 2193 in Johannesburg. The fact remains that under the failing ANC, Eskom has once again plunged South Africa into darkness. No amount of vandalism or arson will hide the fact that Eskom continues to fail in its mandate of providing services to the people of South Africa. The truth is that the failing ANC is completely incapable of fixing the challenges at the ailing power utility. The DA is the only party with a plan to fix Eskom with our “cheaper electricity bill”. The DA’s plan would amount to real change, not merely board reshuffles and empty promises. The ANC has killed the lights at Eskom and it is now up to the people to vote the ANC out of power. Update: SAPS must probe DA’s Eskom billboard vandals Today, the Democratic Alliance (DA) laid criminal charges at the Parkview Police Station following the vandalising of a DA billboard highlighting Eskom and ANC’s failure to keep the lights on for South Africans. Those who are involved in destroying our billboard are guilty of malicious damage to property which is a crime punishable by law. Moreover the suspected burning of our billboard is in violation of the Section 92 of the Electoral Act, which states: “From the date on which an election is called to the date the result of the election is determined and declared in terms of section 57, no person may deface or unlawfully remove any billboard, placard or poster published by a registered party or candidate” We call on the South African Police Services (SAPS) to investigate the matter and take the necessary action against the individuals involved. The sabotage of the DA billboard does not change the fact that under the failing ANC, Eskom poses the biggest economic risk to South Africa. The people of South Africa have once again been plunged into darkness while those implicated in state capture corruption keep their illicit gains. The DA will fix its billboard, as no amount of arson or sabotage will deter us from exposing the ANC and Eskom’s failures. South Africans know that the ANC is out of its depth and has no clue how to fix the problems at Eskom. The DA is the only party with its cheaper electricity bill that can turn what is currently a besieged Eskom into a thriving power utility. Statements issued by John Steenhuisen MP, Chief Whip of the Democratic Alliance, 18 February 2019 