This is the fourth and final part of the EFF 2019 manifesto. The previous section can be read here. - SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 1. The EFF government will use science, technology and innovation not as ends in themselves but to produce the knowledge, information, skills and talent needed to support, facilitate and fuel the development and growth of strategic industries and sectors of the economy and society which are central to the overall independence and sovereignty of South African and African people. 2. In order to do this, the EFF government will focus on: - Knowledge acquisition and deepening, - Knowledge creation, - Knowledge transfer, - Developing and nurturing a culture of innovation, and - Ensuring that research and development spending accounts for 2.5% of GDP by 2024. 3. The EFF government will connect all schools to high- speed fibre by 2023. 4. The EFF government will build and upgrade computer and science labs and provide all necessary equipment to every school, creating 5 000 jobs, 2 500 of which will be reserved for women, by 2024. 5. The EFF government will integrate critical thinking and problem solving into every part of the school curriculum by 2024. 6. The EFF government will integrate the use of technology across the curriculum, and into teaching methods, by 2023. 7. The EFF government will include robotics and coding into the curricula at all schools by 2023. 8. The EFF government will increase the intake at institutions of higher learning at both universities and TVETs on an annual basis. 9. The EFF government will synchronise the goals and needs of the economy with the number of places available at each institution of higher learning. 10. The EFF government will incentivise the studying of science, engineering, software development, robotics and artificial intelligence. 11. The EFF government will connect all institutions of higher learning to high-speed fibre by 2023. 12. The EFF government will provide each student with a laptop by 2024. 13. The EFF government will fast-track the digitisation of institutions of higher learning according to annual targets. 14. The EFF government will integrate the use of technology into all fields of study at institutions of higher learning by 2022. 15. The EFF government will support and protect the following industries, while incentivising and encouraging innovation and the use of technology within these industries, thereby creating jobs: - Agriculture and animal husbandry - Health care and pharmaceuticals - Energy - Water and sanitation - Environment - Transport, aerospace and drones - Biotechnology - Mining - Information and communications technology - Industrialisation and manufacturing - Robotics, artificial intelligence and big data - Defence and cybersecurity. 16. The EFF government will build and establish two seed banks by 2024, creating 3 000 jobs, 1 600 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 17. The EFF government will build three agricultural research and development centres, focused on animal husbandry, seeds, and soil and irrigation by 2023, creating 7 000 jobs, 3 600 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 18. The EFF government will train 25 000 farm workers by 2022 on how to operate new farming machinery and computers. 19. The EFF government will establish a digital e-filing system linking the entire South African health care system and all records by 2021, creating 4 000 jobs, 2 500 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 20. The EFF government will establish a state pharmaceutical research and development centre focusing on biotechnology and generic pharmaceuticals, tailored to the pharmaceutical needs of South Africa and the continent, by 2022, creating 2 000 jobs, 1 000 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 21. The EFF government will establish two new research and development centres focused on developing cures and treatments for communicable and non- communicable diseases, integrating the use of traditional forms of medicine, by 2023, creating 2 500 new jobs, 1 300 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 22. The EFF government will establish a research and development centre focused on integrating artificial intelligence and robotics into the health system by 2024, creating 1 500 jobs, 800 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 23. The EFF government will establish a research and development centre focused on developing technology in the renewable energy sector and batteries by 2022, creating 2 500 new jobs, 1 300 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 24. The EFF government will establish a research and development centre focused on nuclear technology and the disposal of nuclear waste by 2023, creating 2 500 new jobs, 1 200 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 25. The EFF government will establish a research and development centre focused on oil and gas refining and the development of clean coal and oil use by 2024, creating 2 000 jobs, 1 000 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 26. The EFF government will increase the number of artisans and engineers employed by Eskom at a 10% annual rate over the next five years, with 60% of all new artisans and engineers employed being women and the youth. 27. The EFF government will establish two research and development centres focused on sewage, dam development and irrigation, and desalination by 2022, creating 3 500 jobs, 1 800 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 28. The EFF government will increase the number of artisans and engineers employed by the Department of Water and Sanitation at a 10% annual rate over the next five years, with 60% of all new artisans and engineers employed being women and the youth. 29. The EFF government will employ 250 software developers, 125 of whom will be women, to provide AI-driven solutions to water management and water scarcity by 2022. 30. The EFF government will complete the digitisation of South Africa’s railway network by 2023, creating 2 500 jobs. 31. The EFF government will employ 350 software developers, 175 of whom will be women, by 2022 to provide AI-driven traffic solutions for South African cities and rail networks. 32. The EFF government will expand the mandate and budget of the South African National Space Agency, creating 7 500 jobs by 2023. 33. The EFF government will establish a research and development centre by 2024, which will be accountable to the Departments of Defence and Transport and will focus on drone development, creating 7 500 jobs, 4 000 of which will be reserved for women. 34. The EFF government will upskill 50 000 miners, 20 000 of whom will be women, by 2024 so that they have the skills to operate new mining machinery and computer systems. 35. The EFF government will establish a new research and development centre by 2022, focusing on new uses for minerals and mineral beneficiation, new methods of mining, and safer methods of mining, creating 10 000 jobs, 5 000 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 36. The EFF government will employ 20 000 new people in cybersecurity, 10 000 of whom will be women and the youth, by 2024. 37. The EFF government will employ 300 software developers, 150 of whom will be women and the youth, to provide AI-driven solutions to policing and the allocation of police resources in South Africa by 2022. 38. The EFF government will facilitate, coordinate and incentivise vertical and horizontal cooperation and coordination between institutions of higher learning, research and development centres, state-owned enterprises, and productive and strategic sectors of the economy. 39. The EFF government will coordinate and facilitate the transfer of skills from the education system to the strategic and productive areas of the economy. 40. The EFF government will encourage and incentivise the application of research and development findings to the various production processes of SOEs and private companies. 41. The EFF government will establish and fund research and development units at all SOEs by 2023, creating 12 000 jobs, 6 000 of which will be reserved for women. 42. The EFF government will require SOEs to spend at least 2% of their budget on research and development by 2022. 43. The EFF government will fast-track the digitisation of all SOEs. 44. The EFF government will encourage the use of artificial intelligence, robotics and advanced technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution at SOEs. 45. The EFF government will establish artificial intelligence, robotics and biotechnology SOEs, creating 45 000 jobs by 2024, 23 000 of which will be reserved for women and the youth. 46. The EFF government will protect and subsidise companies focusing on advanced Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies. 47. The EFF government will provide tax incentives for companies in strategic sectors of the economy that allocate more than 2.5% of their budget to research and development. 48. The EFF government will both regulate and nationalise telecommunications companies. 49. The EFF government will significantly reduce the cost of data. 50. The EFF government will roll out fibre across the country with the goal of universal internet access by 2024, creating 25 000 jobs, 12 500 of which will be reserved for women. 51. The EFF government will fast-track the migration from analogue to digital transmission. 52. The EFF government will subsidise the production of ICT hardware, ICT software, robots, artificial intelligence and biotechnologies. 53. The EFF government will use state financial institutions and SOEs to invest in ICT infrastructure. 54. The EFF government will launch five communication and GPS satellites belonging to the state or SOEs by 2023. 55. The EFF government will require each department, SOE and municipality to submit an annual report detailing how they have innovated and used technologies, particularly advanced Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies, to improve service delivery and meet their mandates. 56. Research and development AND 8% on prescribed developmental goals set by the state as a sole or majority shareholder. 57. The EFF will roll out free Wi-Fi in all schools, institutions of higher learning and public parks. - SPORTS, ARTS, CULTURE AND RECREATION 1. The EFF government will remove apartheid statues and take them to a dedicated apartheid museum as a reminder to future generations under the theme: ‘NEVER AGAIN’. 2. The EFF government will immediately change the National Anthem to the original Nkosi Sikelela I Afrika. 3. The EFF government, through PANSALB, will ensure that every child is able to speak, read and write in their mother tongue before matriculation. 4. The EFF government will establish a statutory body which will regulate and professionalise the arts and culture industry. 5. The EFF will facilitate the provision of financial services specific to the creative industry. 6. The EFF will deal decisively with the culture of artists’ paying bribes to radio DJs to play their music. 7. The EFF government will commission the writing of a proper history of South Africa. 8. The EFF government will build two multi-purpose indoor sports facilities in each district municipality and five in each metropolitan municipality. Each facility will include gym equipment, an indoor pool, an indoor hall comprising six separate pitches which can be used for various sports, and shower facilities, by 2023. 9. The EFF government will build outdoor gyms in each ward. 10. The EFF government will build a minimum of one park in each ward. 11. The EFF government will subsidise the broadcasting of all South Africa’s national sport codes on the SABC. 12. The EFF government will immediately require sponsors of sporting codes to split the money equally between female and male teams, particularly Banyana Banyana. 13. The EFF government will immediately increase the game and training day salaries of all female sports teams representing the country by 200%. 14. The EFF government will change the names of every road, natural attraction, building or any other asset where the name has any direct or indirect link to the colonial or apartheid period by the end of 2019. 15. The EFF government will commission South African sculptors to build statues memorialising African and anti-colonial heroes, with 50% of all statues to be commissioned to be sculpted by women and the youth. 16. The EFF government will refurbish and revitalise all relevant museums and memorials in the country by 2022. 17. The EFF government will require radio stations to play a minimum of 75% African content by 2024. 18. The EFF government will require all TV stations to air a minimum of 75% African content by 2024. 19. The EFF government will build a small outdoor mini- theatre in each ward in the country by 2022. 20. The EFF government will build an arts and culture centre in each ward in the country by 2022. 21. The EFF government will establish a state non-profit music distribution and production company by 2023, which local artists can use to produce and distribute their music, which will also provide legal services to artists so that they can reclaim ownership of their material from record companies. 22. The EFF government will only hire local artists for state events, with prioritisation of up-and-coming artists over those that are already established. 23. The EFF government will loan recording and musical equipment to artists free of charge by 2021. 24. The EFF government will commission local artists to paint and beautify government facilities and public spaces such as schools, hospitals, parks and buildings. 25. The EFF government will require art galleries to exhibit and sell a minimum of 90% locally produced art. 26. The EFF government will allocate a minimum of 75% of the Department of Arts and Culture’s budget to the support and development of local artists. 27. The EFF government will hold monthly festivals in each district municipality, allowing local unknown artists to showcase their talents to the public. 28. The EFF will establish a fund to support all African writers, in particular women, by 2020. 29. The EFF will turn the Pan South African Language Board into an institution supporting democracy with a budget to develop all indigenous languages. 30. The EFF government will buy 3 000 copies of every book published by a South African author to be distributed to libraries across the country. 31. The EFF government will build a community library in every ward by 2023. 32. The EFF government will establish a fund to support the production of local films. 33. The EFF government will establish a central database on which all artists can publish their portfolios. 34. The EFF government will subsidise the distribution of local films by 2020. 35. The EFF will require local film producers to only employ local actors by 2023. 36. The EFF will require any studio or company that wants to film in South Africa to use 95% local actors by 2023. 37. The EFF will require any studio or company that wants to film in South Africa to engage in some form of co- production, with skills hand-over. 38. The EFF will introduce seven more channels on the SABC which will be solely dedicated to the airing of South African and African TV series and movies by 2022. 39. The EFF will require all advertisers to use 90% local music. 40. The EFF will require the co-production of Telenovelas by white and black-owned production companies, with all projects to be handed over to black-owned production companies by 2024. 41. The EFF government will release a once-off grant and partner with the insurance industry to start an insurance company for the creative industry. 42. The EFF government will make sure that broadcasters pay artists their royalties on time, including historical claims. 43. The EFF government will build recording studios for artists in every municipality. 44. The EFF government will ensure that artists own their intellectual property. 45. The EFF government will establish a state organ to replace SAMRO and perform the duties of SAMRO for artists to get their money on time. 46. The EFF government will transform the advertising space. 47. EFF government will work with artists to create programmes for the fashion, photography and design industries etc. and will use existing school and community centre infrastructure as places of training to offer various skills to the youth through extramural activities. 48. The EFF government will create incubator programmes for artists to offer them training in various aspects of running a commercially sustainable creative business. 49. The EFF government will arrest anyone who is found selling pirated material and will also pass legislation for harsher sentences. 50. The EFF government will develop a central, transparent and accessible system for artists to apply for funding and consolidate all government funding into one funding system to achieve maximum impact. 51. The EFF government will build an additional six theatres in Limpopo Province (Polokwane), the Eastern Cape (Mthatha and Port Elizabeth), North-West (Mafikeng), Mpumalanga (Nelspruit) and the Northern Cape (Kimberley). 52. The EFF government will establish functional and well- funded local arts and culture councils in all provinces for the development of arts and culture at a provincial level. 53. The EFF government will establish an arts and culture regulatory body regulated by an act of Parliament for all creative arts bodies to register with and be regulated. All of this is with the aim of professionalising the creative industry. 54. The EFF government, working with the University of the Witwatersrand, University of Cape Town, University of KwaZulu-Natal, University of Fort Hare, University of Limpopo, University of Pretoria and University of the Free State, will establish a national control body to acknowledge and recognise prior learning and practice in the creative industry to empower artists and give them qualifications. 55. The EFF government will take creative arts practitioners with experience and place them in schools to develop the curriculum and to teach and peer review each other. 56. The EFF government will pass legislation for 80% of all adverts that are aired by public broadcasters to use local music and African artists, a 50% minimum of which must be owned by women and the youth. 57. The EFF government will establish a directorate within the Department of Arts and Culture, and employ creative industry practitioners, to offer practitioners in the creative industry on a monthly basis: - Assistance with contracts management, and - Assistance with applications for grants, tax incentives and infrastructure subsidies. 58. The EFF government will establish a creative arts marketing board to assist all practitioners to market their work in Africa and the world. 59. The EFF government will abolish tenders for festivals and will subsidise the hosting of festivals in each province annually. 60. The EFF government will pass legislation to prosecute all music compilers at SABC Radio who get paid by/demand payment from artists for them to play their music in their radio stations. 61. The EFF government will require sporting codes to split their budgets equally between female and male teams by the end of 2019, starting with Banyana Banyana and Bafana Bafana. 62. The EFF government will release a once-off capitalisation grant of R10 billion and partner with the insurance industry and the PIC to design insurance and other financial services products specifically designed for the arts, culture, entertainment, film and music and sport sectors 63. The EFF government will outlaw payola, introduce high penalties and design regulations aimed at giving equitable airplay for new local music and films. All radio stations will be compelled to play a minimum of 51% of local music per day 64. The EFF government will pay royalties owed to living and departed musicians, including processing historical claims 65. The EFF government will replace SAMRO with a state- owned entity which will be tasked with looking after the financial interests of musicians, songwriters and composers and to protect their intellectual property. - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY 1. The EFF government will own 60% of Telkom. 2. The EFF will ensure the diversification of media ownership and transform the media. 3. A minimum of 50% of government advertisements will be spent on black-owned companies, in particular women and youth companies. 4. The EFF government will allocate spectrum in a manner that seeks to drive transformation of the communications sector, break the concentration of control, drive industrialisation, and prioritise state- owned companies which have the highest representation of black people, women and the youth. 5. The EFF will assist black and particularly black female- owned telecommunications companies to enter the market in partnership with the state. 6. The EFF government will roll out fibre across the country with the goal of universal internet access by 2024, creating 75 000 jobs, 38 000 of which will be reserved for women. 7. The EFF government will fast-track the migration from analogue to digital transmission so that migration takes place by the end of 2019. 8. The EFF government will provide free Wi-Fi for all state-owned public transport systems, clinics, hospitals, government buildings, schools and institutions of higher learning. 9. The EFF government will establish free Wi-Fi parks in wards. 10. The EFF government will establish a subsidiary of Telkom which will specifically focus on the production of ICT hardware and software by 2023, creating 15 000 jobs, 7 500 of which will be reserved for women. 11. The EFF government will establish an ICT hardware manufacturing hub in Ekurhuleni focusing on computers and micro-chip development and manufacturing by 2024, creating 45 000 jobs, 25 000 of which will be reserved for women. 12. The EFF government will establish an ICT software development hub in Cape Town by 2024, creating 40 000 jobs, 20 000 of which will be reserved for women. 13. The EFF government will establish an ICT software development hub in eThekwini by 2024, creating 40 000 jobs, 20 000 of which will be reserved for women. 14. The EFF government will require each government department, SOE and municipality to have an ICT plan by 2020, detailing how they will digitalise and migrate to paperless facilities, processes and services. 15. The EFF government will require all government workers to undergo basic ICT training courses. 16. The EFF government will by the year 2020, establish a well-resourced state social media unit which will communicate all government announcements, programmes and decisions, creating 8 000 jobs, 4 000 of which will be reserved for women. 17. The EFF government will require each municipality to have a social media team to deal with service delivery queries, with each team having a minimum of two full- time employees, by 2021. 18. The EFF government will require Telkom to spend 25% of its annual profits on ICT infrastructure over the next five years. 19. The EFF government will build a computer lab attached to every public library in the country. 20. The EFF government will increase the number of staff members employed by the SABC by 11% annually over the next five years. 21. The EFF government will subsidise all community radio and TV stations by 2020. 22. The EFF government will provide interest-free loans to start-ups in the ICT sector by 2021, with 55% of loans to be allocated to women and the youth. 23. The EFF government will digitalise the filling in of government forms so that the public is able to access them, fill them in and submit them online by 2023. 24. The EFF government will employ an additional 5 000 software engineers by 2022. 25. The EFF government will assist black and particularly black female-owned entrants into the communications and media industry, placing a limit on the number of white-owned entrants. 26. The EFF government will prioritise black and particularly black female-owned communication and media companies when it comes to subsidies, market access and state contracts. - ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE 1. The EFF government will see to the labour-absorbing construction of quality roads for all communities by employing people in communities to maintain and ensure the sustainability of the roads. 2. The EFF government will abolish the e-Toll system and will physically remove all e-Toll structures from our roads. 3. The EFF government will investigate ways of helping the taxi industry financially and will find concrete ways of protecting and promoting it into an efficient public transport system. - NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE 1. The EFF government will adopt a long-term funding framework for infrastructure development and will explore different build, operate and transfer models as a means of infrastructure delivery, working with the private sector to build infrastructure through public- private partnerships. 2. The EFF government will maximally use infrastructure development and expansion as a means for massive labour-absorbing industrialisation for the upstream and downstream sectors. 3. The EFF government will establish the following state- owned companies and provide them with strategic and financial support: § A state-owned housing construction company. § A state-owned roads construction company. § A state-owned cement company. 4. The EFF government will introduce laws that compel large corporations to directly contribute to the construction of schools, hospitals and other important social development projects and programmes. 5. Railway infrastructure: - The EFF government will expand the railways, buy new trains, and invest in affordable speed trains along Moloto Road between the Tshwane and Nkangala regions in Mpumalanga, between Soweto and Johannesburg, between Musina and Johannesburg, between Johannesburg and Cape Town and, vitally, between Durban and Johannesburg to transport people and goods that come from the harbour. - The EFF government will upgrade and refurbish all current public transport railway lines by 2021. - The EFF government will increase the number of carriages on public transport railways by 50%, by 2023. - The EFF government will increase the number of carriages on public transport railways by 35%, by 2024. - The EFF government will build railway infrastructure in and around its power plants and coal mines to facilitate easy access thereto by 2022. - The EFF government will build and upgrade railway infrastructure around all mines and industrial hubs by 2022. 6. Water and dam infrastructure: - The EFF government will repair all water treatment centres by 2020. - The EFF government will build a new water treatment facility in each province by 2021. - The EFF government will employ 10 000 artisans to repair all leaks in the water infrastructure with the aim of reducing the amount of water lost by leaks to 10% of the current rate by 2022. - The EFF government will build storm water drains in every street in South Africa by 2022. - The EFF government will build water infrastructure so that each household will have in-house hot running water and sanitation by 2024. - The EFF government will ensure water sustainability for daily and industrial usage by building dams and large-scale water projects with the capacity to sustainably supply South Africa, increasing current capacity by 20%, by 2023. 7. Sports and recreational infrastructure: - The EFF government will build two multi-purpose indoor sports facilities in each district municipality and five in each metropolitan municipality by 2023. Each facility will include gym equipment, an indoor pool, an indoor hall comprising six separate pitches which can be used for various sports, and shower facilities. - The EFF government will build outdoor gyms in each ward by 2022. - The EFF government will build a minimum of one park in each ward by 2022. - The EFF government will build a small outdoor mini- theatre in each ward in the country by 2022. - The EFF government will build an arts and culture centre in each ward in the country by 2022. - The EFF government will build a community library in each ward by 2023. - The EFF government will build recording studios in every municipality for artists to record their work by 2022. 8. Harbour infrastructure: - The EFF government will build three new harbours along the West Coast and six new harbours along the East Coast specifically designed for small-scale fishing vessels to use. - The EFF government will build industrial-size freezers at all harbours for use by small-scale fishermen. - The EFF government will increase the ship and cargo holding capacity of Cape Town Harbour, Richards Bay Harbour, East London and Ngqurha (Port Elizabeth) by 30% by 2022. - The EFF government will re-equip all harbours so that they are able to handle a variety of products, including industrial products. - The EFF government will increase the fuel storage capacity of all harbours by 30%, by 2024. - The EFF government will install industrial-size x-ray machines at all harbours by 2021. - The EFF government will increase the railway line capacity of all major harbours by 30%, by 2023. 9. Educational infrastructure: - The EFF government will electrify all schools by 2021. - The EFF government will ensure that there is hot running water and in-house sanitation in every school by 2021. - The EFF government will tar all roads around schools by 2021. - The EFF government will ensure that no school is built from inappropriate material by 2020. - The EFF government will build two grass fields, two pitches and a swimming pool at every school by 2023. - The EFF government will build a library in all schools without libraries by 2022. - The EFF government will connect all schools to high-speed fibre by 2023. - The EFF government will connect all institutions of higher learning to high-speed fibre by 2023. - The EFF government will ensure that each institution of higher learning is connected to a railway line or has a taxi rank by 2023. 10. Health care infrastructure: - The EFF government will build a taxi rank at every hospital by 2022. - The EFF government will tar all roads around public health care facilities by 2022. - The EFF government will connect every public health care facility by 2023. - The EFF government will upgrade hospitals such that each district in South Africa has a regional or tertiary hospital with a minimum of 450 beds, open 24 hours a day, with internal medicine, paediatrics, obstetrics, gynaecology and general surgeons, by 2022. - The EFF government will build specialised hospitals for the following disease categories: tuberculosis, diabetes mellitus, cerebrovascular diseases, heart disease, hypertensive diseases, chronic lower respiratory diseases and ischaemic heart diseases. - The EFF government will build at least one clinic per ward in all wards of South Africa and will extend this to one polyclinic per village in wards that are composed of more than one village by 2024. 11. Community infrastructure: - The EFF government will increase the number of drug rehabilitation facilities in the country by 50%, by 2024. - The EFF government will construct and maintain central abattoirs in every municipality to give access to the market on a durable and sustainable basis to producers of chicken, cattle, sheep, pig and sheep meat products, by 2022. - The EFF government will build a market place with stands in each ward by 2022. - The EFF will establish multi-purpose community centres, which will include free Wi-fi, in every ward by 2023. - INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 1. The EFF government will work towards ending the global imperialist dominance of the West. It will build relations with all progressive nations in Latin America, Asia and the African continent. The aim will be to establish a world order that is not dominated by the West but is conducive to equal political and economic relations. 2. The EFF government will lead a progressive programme to build international political, social and economic solidarity among African states. 3. The EFF government will lead a progressive programme to reject foreign and in particular Western domination of African economies. 4. The EFF government will lead a progressive programme which will end Africa’s being merely an exporter of natural resources, turning it into an economy that beneficiates and industrialises its own raw materials. 5. The EFF government will work towards the rejection of the Africa Command Centre, a military programme of the United States based in Botswana. 6. The EFF government will work towards the African isolation of Botswana, which has been home to an imperialist military base, and fight for progressive internal reforms within Botswana which should involve the people of Botswana. 7. The EFF government will work towards building a strong relationship with Lesotho and will ensure that the resources that South Africa receives from Lesotho, particularly water, benefit the people of Lesotho. 8. The EFF government will, within five years, fight for democratic political reforms in Swaziland, including the political and economic isolation of the Monarchy, until there are meaningful political changes and tolerance in the country. 9. The EFF government will protect Zimbabwe from imperialist threats and sanctions, ensuring that Zimbabwe is self-sustainable and returns to using its own independent currency within five years. 10. The EFF government will implement incremental boycotts, divestment and sanctions against the apartheid state of Israel as a concrete form of solidarity with the Palestinians to end the illegal occupation of Palestinian territories by Israel. 11. The EFF government will build sustainable and balanced relations with all progressive forces in the world and will relate with growing economies, particularly China, Russia, Brazil and India, in a mutually beneficial way. 12. The EFF government will work in solidarity with the people of Western Sahara to realise real political independence from colonial domination. 13. The EFF government will radically pursue the democratisation and radical transformation of multilateral bodies such as the UN Security Council so that they are reflective of the countries of the world, as opposed to reflecting the economic and military strength of countries. 14. The EFF government will radically pursue regional economic integration with a view to easing economic trade within the African continent. 15. The EFF government, with the cooperation of regional and continental governance structures, will engage in ethical peacekeeping missions to ensure peaceful resolutions in conflict-ridden regions. 16. The EFF government will advocate for a Pan African Parliament (PAP) to have legislative powers to hold other states accountable. 17. The EFF government will advocate for the establishment and functioning of an African Court and the equipping thereof with resources. 18. The EFF government will play a leading role in the promotion of intra-African trade partnerships and relationships. This means that the EFF government will direct the South African economy to purchase goods and services that can be produced within the African economy, whilst exporting its economic goods and services to other countries within the African economy. 19. The EFF will build relations with countries that appreciate that South Africa and Africa as a whole is not merely a supplier of natural resources and products, but a country and continent that should develop industrially and technologically. 20. The EFF government will build relations with countries and economies that are willing to invest in real and genuine industrial development and skills transfer to the South African and African economies. 21. The EFF government will lead a progressive programme to reject the foreign, particularly Western, domination of African economies as well as so-called neoliberal globalisation. 22. The EFF government will radically pursue regional economic integration with the view to easing economic trade within the African continent. This will include the radical transformation of the African Union and the revision of its Project 2063 into a more comprehensive Project 2038, by which year the African economy must resemble the best practices found in, for example, the modern Chinese economy while guaranteeing basic democratic freedom. 23. The EFF government will champion global co-operation between progressive political parties and governments which subscribe to the humanist ideologies of the left and believe in people before profits as opposed to the neoliberal philosophy of celebrating greed, selfishness, exploitation and the concentration of wealth among the richest 1% of the world’s population. 24. The EFF will fight African leaders who want to stay in power forever. 25. The EFF government will strengthen the African Union to intervene in places where there are political instabilities and social crises. 26. The EFF government will re-evaluate all trade agreements. 27. The EFF government will fight for the International Criminal Court (ICC) to prosecute war lords such as Tony Blair and George Bush. 28. The EFF government will mobilise and fight trade embargoes against Cuba through increased trade exchanges. 29. The EFF government will ensure that the International Criminal Court is restructured and democratised so that it is enabled to prosecute war criminals across the board, including western leaders. 30. The EFF government will fight for a borderless Africa and a single currency in the medium to long-term 31. The EFF government will advocate for the introduction of Ki-Swahili as a common and compulsory official language of communication across the African continent. ENDS Issued by the EFF, 2 February 2019 