Eskom fails to meet on urgent complaint by residents 16 July 2019 It is disappointing that, despite a productive meeting with Eskom officials in the province, led by Generating Unit Manager yesterday, Eskom’s Board and shareholder have failed to honour an urgent request for a meeting to discuss concerns raised by our residents regarding Eskom’s credit control measures. Following my engagement with Eskom’s Gauteng officials yesterday, a meeting for this afternoon was to be secured to address the urgent needs of residents – given the complex nature of the issues discussed between myself and Eskom’s operational team. This morning, I had a lengthy discussion with the CEO of Eskom who appeared to question the urgency behind this matter. Presently, Eskom has resolved not to maintain or repair their infrastructure in areas where there are high levels of non-payment of Eskom accounts. The effect is to institute a blanket punishment against even paying residents, and taken to its logical conclusion, is a violation of residents’ rights as well as a gross abuse of power. While the City of Joburg does not usually seek to interfere in Eskom’s own affairs, given the circumstances, I feel compelled to enter the fray on behalf of our residents. The City has to protect the interests of residents, prevent the destruction of our infrastructure during protests regarding this matter and preserve the limited JMPD capacity, which is currently being directed towards managing said protest action. Quite simply, Eskom has a legal obligation to provide electricity to those residents who duly honour their financial obligations to the utility. While Eskom has every right to recoup expenses from non-paying customers, such must be done fairly. It is therefore deeply disappointing that Eskom has not met the joint commitment reached yesterday, never mind indicating when such a meeting could take place. Truth be told, the troubles faced by Eskom extend far beyond the area of Soweto alone; years of corruption and maladministration have resulted in the mass looting of the power utility resulting in close to R500 million in reported debt. Eskom cannot try turn this legacy of corruption and mismanagement around by punishing ordinary law-abiding residents, who serve as easy targets, while corrupt politicians and individuals responsible for the state-owned enterprise’s downfall are allowed to walk free. To truly turn the legacy of maladministration around, Eskom must demonstrate that it is prepared to seriously reform the organisation, including, apply consequence management for those who have been responsible for the mass mismanagement looting at the organisation. Those who up to their knees in corruption must face the full might of the law, including getting the money stolen from the entity returned to South Africans. Despite working across different spheres of government, it is important for Eskom and the City of Joburg to work together to finding urgent, long-lasting solutions to the issues faced by residents in Soweto, as well as other parts of the City, affected by ongoing blackouts arising from Eskom’s credit management processes. I will be writing to Eskom, requesting they urgently advise on when the promised engagement may take place. Should my request go unheeded, I will have no choice but to pursue urgent dispute resolution proceedings with the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (NERSA), in terms of Section 4(1)(c)(i) of the Electricity Act, No. 41 of 1987 (“the Act”), between the City (as a consumer as defined in the Act as well as on behalf of the affected residents of the City) and Eskom. Issued by Luyanda Mfeka, Director: Mayoral Communications, Office of the Executive Mayor, 16 July 2019