Memorandum of demands 1 July 2019 FROM: UMKHONTO WE SIZWE MILITARY VETERANS ASSOCIATION - GAUTENG TO:  ANC SECRETARY GENERAL, COMRADE ACE MAGASHULE We, veterans of the people’s liberation army in South African, Umkhonto weSizwe (MK), as represented by the Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA), record with a deep sense of sadness how our members - the heroes and heroines, the martyrs who gave their lives for our freedom, are now forgotten and treated like beggars in the democratic society, whilst a defender of Apartheid like former apartheid President FW de Klerk, and others who committed crimes against humanity, are treated with dignity. We note how, with monotonous consistency those in leadership continue to tear the people’s beloved liberation movement, the African National Congress (ANC), apart with factional battles and depart from the National Democratic Revolution (NDR) programme and even ignore the Resolutions of the movement as is the case with the latest 54th NASREC Conference of 2017. It is our solemn belief that the demise of the ANC is closely linked to that of the Republic because the ANC is the leader of our society in constructing a non-racial, united and prosperous South Africa. This is the very axis on which the future of our country rests. As erstwhile members of MK - the armed wing of the ANC - founded in 1961 by comrade Nelson Mandela and his peers, and solidified by thousands upon thousands of men and women across the length and breadth of our country who gave their lives by swelling the ranks of MK in defence or their country and their people; we cannot stand by idly, as these developments continue without as sign of abeyance. They evoke unpleasant memories of the turbulent apartheid years, and worst still, they denigrate the heavy price this nation has paid for this freedom and democracy. Accordingly, we call upon the Secretary General (SG) of the ANC, to ensure that the organizations’ Officials include this memorandum of demands in their Agenda, at their earliest sitting. That in line with the 54th conference resolutions, that meeting must pronounce itself on how it is implementing: 1.   The 4th National Policy Conference on the urgent need for renewal, recognizing that renewal is principally about building the ANC’s resilience, enhancing its transformative and governance capacity, and its ability to adapt to changing situations so that it can continue to serve and lead the people; and how; 2.  Are they ensuring maximum unity of the ANC and the Alliance, enabling us to sharpen our capacity to advance and defend the national democratic revolution; and how 3.   They are to ensure the Creation of a Stand-alone Ministry for Military Veterans and address the persistent under resourcing of the Department of Military Veterans with a dedicated budget for the Department of Military Veterans which should ensure the development and well-being of Military Veterans; 4.   How the state is going to mobilize resources to reverse both the human and material conditions of those displaced by the previous land policies; and therefore resolves as follows: a. Adopt transformation imperatives, dealing with the triple challenge of poverty, unemployment and inequality in rural areas ought to be addressed, without any further delay. b. Equitable land allocation and use across race, gender and class, must be ensured. c. Replace the willing buyer willing seller approach, with the “Just and equitable” principle in the Constitution immediately where the state is acquiring land for land reform purposes. d. Expropriation without compensation on land acquired through unlawful means or used for illegal purposes having due regard to Section 25 of the Constitution. e. Expedite the promulgation of the new Expropriation Act. 5.   Clarity of the nationalization of the South Reserve Bank. How the government will implement the directive of the ANC 54th National Conference, with regards to measures to address intergovernmental debts, and to make funds available for developmental purposes, and finally; 6.    We call for the Resolution to work for unity among all ex-MK combatants to be implemented in a fair manner; 7.   We are deeply concerned by the array of public attacks that are constantly being directed at the Public Protector and amongst other Chapter Nine Institutions. We call upon the Officials to ensure that these institutions are given space to do their work independently, subject only to the Constitution, impartially, without fear, favor or prejudice. 8.  We want the finalization of the rank review process, both in SAPS and SANDF. 9.   Utilisation and untigration of ex-combatants into the security cluster, namely Home Affairs, State Security, SAPS and the Metro police. 10.  The NEC of the ANC must under no circumstances allow the so-called MK National Council any office in Luthuli House. We demand that a detailed response addressing these demands be sent to us in writing within 14 days, followed by an immediate meeting with the National Office Bearers of the. ANC. Any failure to do so, we will deem as being in disregard to our just and legitimate concerns by a constitutional structure of the ANC. Issued by MKMVA GAUTENG, 1 July 2019