Minister Lindiwe Sisulu says prime national-owned land has been redirected 26 July 2019 Western Cape Minister of Human Settlements, Tertuis Simmers says he was pleased to learn, during the National Council of Provinces’ (NCOP) debate on Human Settlements that the five pieces of well-located land in Cape Town, owned by national government have been redirected. Speaking at the National Council of Provinces’ (NCOP) Policy debate on Budget Vote for the Human Settlements, Appropriation Bill, yesterday, Minister Simmers said: “My colleague, the Provincial Minister of Transport and Public Works and I are engaging about releasing provincially owned land and buildings which are close to transport, the CBD and economic opportunities. These engagements are fruitful and we are making significant progress. I’d like to suggest to Minister Sisulu to encourage her colleague, the Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure, Patricia de Lille, to also release the five tracts of well-located land, Ysterplaat, Denel, Culemborg, Youngsfield and Wingfield, along with the budget for human settlement development.” Upon her response, the Minister of Human Settlements Water and Sanitation, Lindiwe Sisulu said: “We will deal with the matter of the land that belongs to Denel and etcetera. This land has been redirected and is being used.” Said Simmers: “Although Minister Sisulu did not directly state that Denel, Ysterplaat, Culemborg, Youngsfield and Wingfield have been redirected for human settlement development, I have to believe that she was indeed referring to it, as this is what we’ve been calling for. If not, then she should clarify her statement. I’m however looking forward to engaging Minister Sisulu about the utilisation of this nationally owned land, as it could yield up to 93 000 housing opportunities and it’s ideally located close to the CBD, transport and economic opportunities. We are willing to work hand-in-hand with the Minister about these five pieces of land, as we remain committed to accelerating human settlement delivery, utilising technology, while promoting social inclusion through the development of integrated, resilient and sustainable human settlements in an open society.” Issued by Marcellino Martin, Spokesperson for Minister Tertuis Simmers, 26 July 2019