DA calls for immediate recall of Ambassador Bruce Koloane 14 July 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has written to the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation (DIRCO), Naledi Pandor, to request the immediate recall of Ambassador Bruce Koloane from his posting to the Netherlands, following his incriminating testimony at the Zondo Commission this past week. In his testimony, Ambassador Koloane admitted under oath that, while he was still the Chief of State Protocol, he abused the power of his office to benefit the Gupta family by enabling them to land their private jet at the Waterkloof Airforce base in 2013. Ambassador Koloane’s actions were a direct breach of our national security and a violation of the National Key Point Act as he oversaw the landing of a civilian plane at a National Key Point. The National Key Point Act implicates Ambassador Koloane for serious wrongdoing, as in Section 25, 10 (1) it clearly states that: “Any person who, at, on, in connection with or in respect of any National Key Point performs any act which, if such act would have constituted an offence in terms of the Official Secrets Act, 1956 (Act No. 16 of 1956), if performed or executed at, on, in common with or respect of any prohibited place, as defined in section 1 of that Act, should be guilty of an offence and liable to penalties prescribed for that act in that Act” The DA is of the view that this is enough reason for the ambassador to be recalled. He has clearly breached the law and this makes his continued stay as an ambassador untenable. Thee Minister must also provide clarity on reports, that DIRCO has allegedly taken a decision to let Koloane conclude his term as ambassador to the Netherlands, with a possibility that he will continue working for the Department after his tenure. If this is the official position of DIRCO, the Ramaphosa-administration purported fight against state capture and corruption is a farce. The state cannot continue to provide corrupt officials with jobs as ambassadors overseas when they have broken the law – they are South African citizens, first and foremost, and must be held accountable for their actions. There can be no new dawn when we compromise the integrity of our constitution, and allow individuals with authority to be rewarded with high paying jobs after neglecting the importance of our state security. Issued by Darren Bergman, DA Shadow Minister of International Relations and Cooperation, 14 July 2019