EFF statement on the rising crisis levels of unemployment 30 July 2019 The Economic Freedom Fighters notes that the unemployment crisis in South Africa is deepening, and now officially stands at 29% and 38,5% when discouraged work seekers are included. What this means is that more than 10 million South Africans who are capable of working, and looking for jobs cannot be absorbed into waged economic activities. This is the highest number of unemployed people in the history of South Africa. It is a proven fact that there is a direct relationship between unemployment, poverty and other social ills such as crime and diseases. What this means is that under the current Ramaphosa administration, the quality of lives for the people of South Africa will drastically decline. This is despite the fact that both domestic and imperialist capitalist interests and their media are portraying Ramaphosa as the best thing to have happened in South Africa. Ramaphosa has been the head of state and president for more than 18 months now and it's under his leadership that the economy is shrinking, jobs are lost and people getting poorer. This happens when the Ramaphosa administration is dismally failing to bring the much needed stability in major state owned companies such as Eskom, Denel, SAA, Prasa, and Transnet. The worsening of the quality of life for many South Africans happens when Ramaphosa has built an alliance with capitalists through some investments Conferences, which are evidently hoax as they do not translate into meaningful benefits for the people of South Africa. The EFF cautioned the people of South Africa during elections that the ANC under whoever's leadership is inherently incapable of salvaging our country from crisis levels of poverty, unemployment and inequality. The ANC and Ramaphosa are not the solution to the problems of South Africa. The reality is that under the ANC and Ramaphosa leadership, South Africa's economy will continue to shrink, jobs will be lost, poverty will deepen, the poor will get poorer whilst the rich get richer. The 2019 EFF Elections Manifesto presented the most cogent and practical jobs strategy which would develop all areas and improve people's lives. The EFF remains the only hope for our people. Issued by Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, National Spokesperson, EFF, 30 July 2019