Mahikeng ANC councillors should lay criminal charges against Mayor and MM on VBS claims 25 July 2019 The Democratic Alliance (DA) calls on ANC councillors who have accused Mahikeng Local Municipality Mayor, Betty Diakanyo, and the Municipal Manager (MM), Thabo Mokwena, of allegedly investing money into VBS Mutual Bank to come forward and report the matter to the police. It has been reported that some ANC councillors in Mahikeng have accused Mayor Diakanyo and the MM of corruption saying they invested money in VBS without the knowledge or involvement of council members. Mahikeng Local Municipality invested at least R100 million into VBS Mutual Bank, this is money that was meant to uplift the lives of people and communities and to keep basic services running. The people of Mahikeng have suffered long enough under the mismanagement of the ANC government. Service delivery is at a standstill, roads are dilapidated and in ruins, there is sewage running down the streets, refuse and waste is never collected. Last year, 30 August 2018, the DA filed a motion of no confidence against the Mayor due to the financial misconduct and the rampant disregard for the Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) within the municipality, our motion was unfairly dismissed by the speaker. In terms of the Prevention & Combating of Corrupt Activities Act 12 of 2004 (PRECCA) it is a requirement for public office bearers and people in positions of authority to report cases of corruotion. The ANC councillors who claim to have knowledge regarding the Mayor and MM have an obligation to come forward and ensure that those involved in the VBS saga are held accountable. To date no one has been held accountable, these same councillors who claim to have knowledge about the VBS saga stood by and watched as the municipality crumbled under mismanagement and corruption. The people of Mahikeng cannot be held ransom by the idea that there is a bad and good ANC, what exists is an ANC that has led the municipality to a near collapse. The people of Mahikeng have suffered long enough under the ANC, we need real change that will stop corruption and speed up service delivery. Only a DA-led government can bring this change to Mahikeng. Issued by Joe Motau, DA Caucus Leader, Mafikeng, 25 July 2019