ECONOMIC FREEDOM FIGHTERS EFF STATEMENT ON SECOND NATIONAL PEOPLES ASSEMBLY, PARLIAMENT DEPLOYMENTS AND OTHER POLITICAL ISSUES Tuesday, 02 July, 2019 NATIONAL PEOPLE'S ASSEMBLY At its Special Meeting convened on the 1st of July, 2019, the Central Command Team resolved that the EFF Second National People's Assembly will be convened on the 13 16 December, 2019 at the Expo Centre, Nasrec under the theme "Consolidating the Ground Towards Socialist Power". The National People's Assembly is an elective conference of the EFF, the highest decision-making body and, according to the EFF Constitution, takes place every five years. Accordingly, the CCT has adopted guidelines that pave the path towards the election of delegates from branches, including in regions, and provinces. These will be published on the EFF website for easy access. Within these guidelines are strict rules and deadlines for election of delegates, audit of branches, as well as conduct of all fighters and commissars on lobbying for leadership positions. Members and leaders of the EFF are therefore called upon to internalise these guidelines and participate in the lead up to this assembly with the highest discipline and determination. The Discussion Documents will also be published on the EFF website and they will be sent to branches, so that branches are not only ceased with matters of leadership but they also discuss the state of the nation in South Africa through the Discussion Documents of the EFF and provide what could be a sustainable solution to the challenges that are confronting the poor masses of our people on the ground. PARLIAMENT COMMITTEE DEPLOYMENTS Post 2019 General Elections, the EFF increased its seats from 31 to 53 Members of Parliament (MPs), with 44 in the National Assembly (NA) and 9 in the National Council of Provinces (NCOP). All 53 MPs are accordingly deployed to standing, portfolio and select committees of both houses including parliamentary bodies, forums and legislative institutions. These deployments took into account 5th Parliament experience, MPs' individual activism and professional background, and EFF key focus areas in the 6th Parliament. Our deployment is as follows: Party Leader: CiC Julius Malema Chief Whip: DP Floyd Shivambu Whips: Godrich Gardee Hlengiwe Mkhaliphi Mbuyiseni Ndlozi Veronica Mente Reneilwe Mashabela Tebogo Mokwele The President and Commander in Chief Julius Malema is deployed to the Constitutional Review Committee to maximum participation towards the amendment of Section 25 of the Constitution to bring to finality the land question. The President is deployed to Pan African Parliament as the Pan-Africanist leading the struggle for economic freedom not only in South Africa but in Africa and all over the world. He is also deployed in the Judicial Service Commission to ensure continuity, strengthen and transform the judiciary through the appointment of competent and ethical judges. The President will also continue to serve in the Parliament Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interest. The Deputy President and Chief Whip in Parliament Commissar Floyd Shivambu is deployed to the Standing Committee on Finance to ensure continuity of the work to transform the financial sector. He is deployed to Constitutional Review Committee together with President to ensure maximum participation towards the amendment of Section 25 of the Constitution to bring to finality the land question. As a Chief Whip, Deputy President, will continue to participate in the Chief Whip's Forum and also serve in the Parliament Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interest. The Secretary-General Commissar Godrich Gardee is deployed to serve in the Magistrate Commission. The Deputy Secretary General Commissar Hlengiwe Mkhaliphi is deployed to the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (COGTA) as one of the EFF key focus areas given the collapse of local sphere of government. She is deployed to National Assembly (NA) Programming Committee and Chief Whips Forum's Forum as part of governance forums to ensure EFF maximum participation in Parliament. She is also deployed to the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Parliament Forum. Other Commissars are deployed to portfolio, standing and select committees as follows: Commissar Dr. Mbuyiseni Ndlozi — PC on Public Enterprise, Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence and PC on Communication as an alternate member. Commissar Veronica Mente — Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) and Committee on Auditor-General as an alternate member. Commissar Tebogo Mokwele — PC on Labour and Employment and Financial Management of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures. Commissar Reneiloe Mashabela — PC on Basic Education and Committee on Multiparty Women's Caucus. Commissar Natasha Ntlangwini — Standing Committee on Appropriations. Commissar Dr. Suzan Thembekwayo — PC on Health Commissar Marshall Dlamini — PC on Mineral and Energy Commissar Fana Mokoena — PC on Communications Commissar Thilivhali Mulaudzi — PC on Justice and Correctional Services Commissar Thembi Msane — PC on International Relations and Cooperation Commissar Pebane Moteka — PC on Tourism Commissar Delisile Ngwenya — PC on Social Development Fighter Makoti Khawula - PC on Women, Children and Persons with Disabilities Commissar Nazier Paulsen — PC on Environment, Forestry and Fisheries Fighter Naledi Chirwa — PC on Health Fighter Yoliswa Yako — PC on Trade and Industry Commissar Mmabatho Mokause — PC on Public Service and Administration Fighter Andries Shembeni — PC on Police Commissar Ntokozo Hlonyana — Standing Committee on Auditor General Fighter Ringo Madlingozi — PC on Sports, Arts and Culture Commissar Sam Matiase — PC on Defence and Military Veterans and Joint Standing Committee on Defence Commissar Primrose Sonti — PC on Women, Children and Persons with Disabilities Commissar Mgcini Tshwaku - PC on Public Works and Infrastructure Development Commissar Nontando Nolutshungu — PC on Transport Commissar Ciliesta Motsepe — PC on Public Service and Administration Fighter Patrick Sindane — PC on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development Fighter Dumisani Mthenjane — PC on Mining and Energy Commissar Shirley Mokgotho — PC Human Settlement Commissar Lerato Tito — PC on Home Affairs Fighter Makhosini Chabangu — PC on Transport Fighter Thokozani Langa — PC on Small Business and Development Commissar Mathapelo Siwisa — PC on Public Works and Infrastructure PC on Higher Education, Development Fighter Vuyani Pambo — PC on Home Affairs President of Student Commissar Peter Keetse — Science and Technology Fighter Khanya Ceza — PC on COGTA Fighter Laetitia Arries — PC on Human Settlement, Water and Sanitation Commissar Tseko Mafanya — PC on Police Commissar Mathibe Rebecca Mohlala — PC on Human Settlement, Water and Sanitation Fighter Kenneth Montwedi — PC on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development Fighter Rosina Komane — Standing Committee on Appropriations. Commissar Nkagisang Koni — Select Committee on Appropriations, COGTA and Constitutional Review Committee Fighter Brenda Mathevula — Select Committee on Education and Recreation, Petitions and Executive Undertaking Fighter Sam Zandamela — Select Committee on Economic and Business Development, and Trade and International Relations Commissar Andrew Arnolds — Select Committee on Communications and Public Enterprises Fighter Slindile Luthuli — Select Committee on Education and Recreation, and Joint Standing Committee on Financial Management of Parliament. Fighter Kenny Motsamai — Select Committee on Security and Justice, Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence and Joint Standing Committee on Defence Fighter Tau Moletsane — Select Committee on Finance Fighter Thembinkosi Apleni — Select Committee on Land and Mineral Resources Fighter Nonky Lehihi — Select Committee on Social Services. We are certain that these deployments will sharpen and bring much needed quality into the work of Parliament to legislate, hold the executive accountable and move a step closer attainment of economic freedom for our people. CONDUCT OF PARLIAMENT PRESIDING OFFICERS We must express our deep concem on the conduct of the Chair of the National Council of Provinces, Amos Masondo, who sleeps during proceedings. During the debate on the State of the Nation Address, Amos Masondo kept dosing off from the chair, leaving the proceedings unattended. This conduct will result in a motion of no confidence because the EFF will never allow parliament to be turned into a mockery by presiding officers who sleep on duty. The house is also ceased with an erratic and lunatic Deputy Speaker, Lechesa Tsenoli who is biased, unruly and undermines court decisions on parliament. There is a standing court decision that the statement "the ANC government killed workers in Marikana" is not unparliamentary. Yet Tsenoli, true to his lunacy, forced an EFF MP during the SONA debate to withdraw this statement, regardless of being told about the court decision on the matter. We have already written to the Joint Rules Committee to subject Tsenoli to a disciplinary process and have him withdraw his unlawful ruling in the house. No one can knowingly undermine a court ruling from the position of chair of parliament without consequences. We must warn him that if he does not improve, he too will be subjected to a motion of no confidence. The efficiency, progress and stability of proceedings in the house depends on preceding officers who are competent, composed, unbiased and respectful of court rulings. PUBLIC PROTECTOR REMEDIAL ACTION ON PRAVIN GORDHAN President Cyril Ramaphosa's decision not to act on the remedial action of the Public Protector in relation to Pravin Gordhan is a direct assault on a chapter nine institution, and the constitution itself. The office of the Public Protector, regardless of the individual who occupies it, must be respected. The remedial action of this office is binding and can only be set aside by a court law. Therefore, Pravin Gordhan's mere application for review is not sufficient grounds to ignore, refuse or delay the implementing the remedial action of the Public Protector. A review application does not set aside the remedial action, only a court of law can do so. The president, like all of us, is bound by the decisions of the Public Protector. He must subject Pravin Gordhan to discipline for his role in the irregular awarding of early retirement pensions to Ivan Pillay, at taxpayer's expense. It is important to note that Ramaphosa dismissed Tom Moyane from his position as SARS Commissioner purely on the recommendation of the interim report of the Nugent Commission and irrespective of the fact that Moyane had brought a review application to set aside those recommendations. More recently, Ramaphosa did the same to with regards to Advocates Nomgcobo Jiba and Lawrance Mrwebi of the National Prosecuting Authority following the recommendations of the Mokgoro Commission of Inquiry. In essence he did not hesitate to act on mere recommendations of these commissions, which are not chapter nine institutions, yet shows contempt to the binding remedial action of an office established by the Constitution. Ramaphosa is continuing to treat Pravin Gordhan as a god that is not subject to the law like all of us. Above all, like Zuma, he is not protecting the constitution by complying with the remedial action of the Public Protector. This conduct invites all other politicians being investigated by the office of the Public Protector to also undermine and ignore its remedial action. We are taking legal advice on a brining a constitutional court application to compel Ramaphosa to comply with the remedial action of the Public Protector as we did with Zuma on Nkandla. It does not matter how we all feel about the incumbent, we can even criticise her, but the office must be protected and respected. No one can say they uphold the rule of law and the constitution, but ignore the office of the Public Protector and its remedial action. Issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 2 July 2019