Eskom: PSA condemns appointment of Jabu Mabuza 31 July 2019 The Public Servants Association (PSA) condemns the appointment of Jabu Mabuza as Eskom’s Interim Executive Chairperson whilst he also holds the positions of Acting Chief Executive Officer of Eskom Holdings and Acting Group CEO of Eskom. While this appointment might not be viewed as illegal, it shows a lack good cooperative governance, especially with the power utility having lost R20.7bn for the 2018/19-financial year, in what many are describing as a record-breaking loss while the country’s economy dives deeper into a crisis. The PSA pointed out that failures at the utility are a direct result of poor cooperate governance and this move to appoint Mr Mabuza as Eskom continues to bleed billions in losses, shows the lack of ethics in government administration. It cannot be that the Minister of Public Enterprises could not find any better-qualified candidate for this position in the entire country. This decision is viewed as extending the powers of Ministers, going against sound governance principles, the lack of which has led to the current problems experienced in Eskom. Following these disastrous losses and continuous bailouts by over-burdened taxpayers, it would be expected that the entire board and senior management be replaced, not that Mr Mabuza be given additional powers. The PSA further stated that during Mr Mabuza’s time as Eskom Chairperson, there has been no progress on how to rescue the utility financially. In addition, no plans have been announced on the much-hyped spilt of the utility into three parts, namely generation, transmission and distribution. The PSA is horrified by this decision, which simply demonstrates that there is no real desire by government to uphold good corporate governance, ethical behaviour and root out mismanagement. The PSA calls on Minister Pravin Gorhan not to spite his face by being comfortable with a yes-sir brigade around him. Eskom is a national crisis that requires a sober-mindedness approach. Issued by Tahir Maepa on behalf of PSA, 31 July 2019