EFF STATEMENT ON THE PUBLIC PROTECTOR'S REPORT ON RAMAPHOSA Friday, 19 July 2019 The EFF notes the Public Protector's Report on Cyril Ramaphosa, which has found that Ramaphosa misled parliament in his response regarding the reciept of a R500 000 donation from BOSASA. This means Ramaphosa has violated his executive ethics code, and the constitution of the republic. The Public Protector has therefore directed that, Parliament must subject Ramaphosa to discipline. The EFF welcomes this report, and calls on Ramaphosa to comply with the Public Protector's remedial action. Above all, the Speaker of the National Assembly must initiate a process to subject Ramaphosa to parliamentary discipline. The EFF further expresses great concern on the millions of rands that funded Ramaphosa's campaign to become the ANC president. We agree with the Public Protector that this amounts to State Capture, in particular, as some of these individuals could go on to benefit from state business, or be preferred for positions in state institutions and companies. In our view, this underlines Ramaphosa's reluctance to act on the Public Protector's remedial action in relation to Pravin Gordhan. This is because he knew that he too is implicated in breaking the constitution. As a result, he has allowed, and opened up the office of the Public Protector to attacks, disregard, and disrespect from the ranks of his own cabinet. Without respect of chapter nine institutions, there can never be the rule of law. Ramaphosa must comply and restore confidence in the office of the Public Protector and the rule of law. We reiterate our call that Ramaphosa must disclose the names of companies and individuals who funded his campaign. Long ago, the CIC, Julius Malema, already made this call to him in parliament that he must take the nation into confidence, about who funded his ANC presidential campaign. He did not listen then, we hope he will not repeat the same now. Ramaphosa must disclose the names of his funders, even before the parliament process begins. He took office on the basis that he will be an accountable and transparent president; the time for him to demonstrate this is long overdue. It will be the greatest shame should he make an application for review of the Public Protector's report in which he personally benefitted to become president, in particular, using taxpayer's money. Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 19 July 2019