Public Works and Infrastructure Committee believes department should start implementing plans 3 July 2019 The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure believes that the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure (DPWI) should start implementing its plans. This week the committee met with the department, the Property Management Training Entity (PMTE) and other entities to deliberate on their annual performance plans and budgets for the year 2019 /2020. The committee alerted the department and entities to the importance of getting clean audits as the use of public funds without a positive impact on the lives of the people cannot be tolerated. The committee commends the department for providing information on its anti-fraud and anti-corruption strategy which states that the turnaround strategy has had the positive impact of bringing about a clean audit and fighting corruption. The committee has noted that the department, PMTE and entities have shown that in spite of challenges, are ready to reconfigure and incorporate the newly added Infrastructure component. The department has identified the following programs to give effect to the 7 Priorities as announced by the President in the State of the Nation Address: - Economic transformation and job creation through the development of Small Harbours and the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP). - Education, skills and health through the Council for the Built Environment and the Construction Industry Development Board. - Consolidation of the social wage through reliable and quality basic services is another important priority. - Spatial integration, human settlements and local government through the Property Management and Trading Entity. - Social cohesion and safe communities is another key priority that the department will advance through the involvement of the Independent Development Trust as a project management agency constructing social infrastructure in collaboration with departments championing projects earmarked to eradicate pit latrines, the improvement of school buildings and building of courts, clinics and hospitals. - Building a capable, ethical and developmental state through the development of Small Harbours. - A better Africa and the world through the certification of innovative building materials by Agrément SA. The Committee is looking forward to holding the executive to account, thus ensuring that the department executes its mandate. Issued by Faith Ndenze on behalf of Parliamentary Communication Services, 3 July 2019