Back to school - third term: Minister Schafer concerned that over 85 000 applications for the 2020 academic year have not been confirmed 8 July 2019 Tomorrow more than a million learners in the Western Cape will return to school after the winter holidays. The third term of the academic year is one of the most important terms for our learners, educators and officials as it is one when important examinations and tests take place. It is also a time where our officials take on the mammoth task of ensuring that the department is prepared for the start of the 2020 academic year by finalising and processing last minute admissions. I am concerned that there are still over 85 000 applications where parents have NOT confirmed their place for 2020. This means the application was successful but the parent has not indicated their final choice on the system Parents have until Thursday 12th July to confirm placement at their school of choice. If they do not confirm their choice, the WCED will allocate the first place where their application was successful. Parents must preferably confirm on the system directly, which is much quicker to do and allows the parent to see the outcome immediately. If parents are unable to confirm on the system directly, they can e-mail, call our district offices or our Head Office for assistance. Parents must provide the learner’s name and surname, the CEMIS number and the name of the school the learner will be attending in 2020 otherwise we cannot confirm placement. I also urge parents who have not received a positive response to remain calm while we process the second phase of the admissions process.  The whole purpose of this phase of admission is to get as many confirmations completed as soon as possible, so that places open up at schools where children are double or triple “parked” in terms of successful applications. By confirming applications now, it will allow us to determine where spaces have opened at schools, so that learners on waiting lists can be accommodated. With 107 days to go until the start of the matric exams, this is an important term for our Grade 12 NSC candidates as this will be the final full term of teaching. The department is supporting schools and matrics in various ways as they prepare for their exams. These have included Winter schools during the holidays. The main focus of all schools will be to complete the curriculum for the term. Good luck and best wishes to our teachers and learners as they prepare for their examinations and assessments as well as to our officials who are ensuring that we are prepared well in advance for the start of the 2020 academic year. Issued by Debbie Schäfer, Western Cape Minister of Education, Western Cape Government, 8 July 2019