On the Radar: - Toyota awards after-sales/owner CRM account- Tiso Blackstar sells off media assets- Creative Circle: May 2019 winners- Free learning platform for animators revamps- Rama spreads account- New House & Leisure editor Features: SoloUnion South Africa offers creative, strategy brains for hireby Herman Manson. Matthew Bull's talent collaborative recently launched here as SoloUnion South Africa under the leadership of Rob McLennan and Gillian Rightford. It's been taking briefs and wrapping up its first projects already. #BrandFocus: Disrupting & challenging the SA banking sceneby Sabrina Forbes. “It’s been a wild ride, an incredible experience. In your lifetime you don’t get an opportunity like this, to literally launch a bank from scratch,” says Luisa Mazinter, TymeBank chief marketing officer. Q5: Empowerment dot com, with Selina Bieber [interview]by Carey Finn. Sabrina Bieber, GoDaddy EMEA’s regional director for Turkey and MENA, talks business about entrepreneurship and women’s empowerment, and how the internet can support both, better. By Invitation Only: PR IP at risk of being used without paymentby Michelle Cavé. A PRCA survey carried out for The Holmes Report indicated that almost 50% of UK PR leaders claim that they experienced IP rights infringement in the last year. I don't believe that this is exclusive to UK PR practitioners. Mike Perk on making your retail operation future-fit [interview]by ORiSA. Future-fit evangelist, Mike Perk, reveals the 10 things digitally mature leaders do to give them the competitive edge. Podcast: Only Connect: What do CMOs want? Heidi Brauer [03]by Bradley Elliott. In this third episode, we talk to Heidi Brauer, CMO of Hollard, who has some great thinking around agencies, the agency process, around pitching, digital segmentation, how we derive insights and how marketers become more commercially minded, if commercially minded at all. Regular Reads: - SA TV Ratings: e.tv — primetime top 20 for May 2019 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headline! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.