MKMVA deeply concerned by the death threats against President* Jacob Zuma and his family and calls for a formal commission of inquiry to expose the spies and counter revolutionaries who have infiltrated the ANC 16 July 2019 The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) is very concerned and outraged about the death threats against President Jacob Zuma and his family. This is nothing else but the behavior of cowards who are evidently scared, and shaken to their core, by the evidence that President Zuma presented to the Commission of Enquiry into State Capture. It is not adequate to have expressions of condemnation of these death threats, strong and concerted action is required. No stone must be left unturned to find those who made these cowardly death threats. Once they are apprehended, they must face the full force of the law. MKMVA also calls on the Government to take all and every neccessary step to protect the safety of President Zuma and his family. It goes without saying that the evidence that President Zuma led about spies inside the ANC, and the plotting that had been going on over literally decades against him, and other progessive pro Radical Economic Transformation (RET) forces, cannot be swept under the proverbial carpet, and poses a very serious threat to the ANC that must faced head-on. It is nothing less than treason that there were/are counter revolutionary sell-outs and spies inside the ANC who are said to have made common cause with local apartheid and international spy agencies. MKMVA concurs with the sentiments expressed by our Treasurer General, comrade Des van Rooyen, that there is absolutely no way that the ANC can allow itself to be led by spies, or former spies. In fact we ascribe to the maxim: Once a spy always a spy. MKMVA insists that the ANC must establish a formal and credible Commission of Inquiry to thoroughly investigation those who have been fingered for spying in President Zuma's evidence. In addition such a Commission of Inquiry should also conduct an overall investigation into the extremely serious matter of spying in general in the ANC, and the infiltration of the ANC by counter revolutionary forces. MKMVA agrees with the remarks of the Secretary General of the ANC, comrade Ace Magashule, that like all other revolutionary organisations, the ANC had also been infiltrated by counter revolutionaries. This situation is totally intolerable for us as ex-MK combatants who have dedicated our lives to the liberation of black, especially African, South Africans. MKMVA will, thus, not accept anything less than a formal and thorough Commission of Inquiry that will expose each and every spy and counter revolutionary that infiltrated our ranks, and root them out. As far as MKMVA is concerned the very essence and integrity of the ANC is at stake. As soldiers who have always been in the frontline of defending the revolution and our beloved Liiberation Movement, the ANC, we will similarly now defend the Integrity of the ANC against the cowardly traitors that have infiltrated our ranks. The time for a thorough cleansing, and recapturing of the true revolutionary soul, of the ANC has arrived. *It is international protocol for former Presidents to continue to be referred to by the title of President. Nowhere in the world is it considered a slight on, or any disregard whatsoever, for incumbent Presidents. Nor should it be in South Africa. MKMVA will in all future media statements therefore refer to Nxamalala by the title of President. Issued by Carl Niehaus, MKMVA National Spokesperson, 16 July 2019