On the Radar: - Brenda Khumalo leaves Collective ID- Rangaka, Barnes now joint CCOs- Fidelity Services Group appoints creative agency- Call to enter 2019 AMASA Awards Features: EXCLUSIVE: Duke, Mark1, Positive Dialogue team up for scaleby Herman Manson. Five years after launching Duke, CEO Wayne Naidoo, has announced the launch of the Duke Group. Advertising Week Africa launching in Oct 2019by Carey Finn. Close to 4000 delegates are expected to gather in Johannesburg for the inaugural event. Young, Gifted & Killing It: Nomaswazi Phumoby Veli Ngubane. The Soweto-born and -raised strategist shares with us her routine for solving some complex brand problems through her kickass strategy. By Invitation Only: The independent state of PR — breaking, evolving, inventingby Keri-Ann Stanton. Would my African PR peers feel the same as the independents in South Africa when it comes to the PR agency of the future? By Invitation Only: Freelancing pitfalls & how to avoid themby Marisa Louw. The decline in SA’s economy has resulted in a rise of freelancers and consultants across all industries. But you don’t simply become a freelancer. Regular Reads: #Campaigns: Gun Safe Cities campaign shows cultural divideby MarkLives. We feature insight into the "Gun Safe Cities Live Activation" campaign by Havas Johannesburg which launched in July 2019. Q5: That South African guy in Kiwi adland, Gary Steele [interview]by Carey Finn. The SA-born acclaimed adman speaks to us about his new role as DDB New Zealand ECD, and what things are like down there. - SA TV Ratings: SABC 3 — primetime top 20 for May 2019 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! One subscription form, three newsletters: sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify headline! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.