Committee calls for participation of all South Africans to curb the escalating murder rate in the country 9 July 2019 The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, has decried the worrying trend of the escalating murder rate in the country. Last weekend’s Philippi murders of 13 people are symptomatic of a complex socio-economic problem that requires an urgent and multifaceted approach. From a policing point of view, the Minister and the senior management of the South African Police Service (SAPS) must move with speed to implement the promises that were made by President Cyril Ramaphosa in his recent State of the Nation Address (SONA) of increasing visibility of police officers on the streets, especially in crime hot spot areas. “While the committee is cognisant of the funding challenges facing all government departments, SAPS must move with speed to implement SONA promise made by the President and which will be the first pillar in the war against crime,” said Ms Joemat-Pettersson. Furthermore, SAPS must strengthen the strategies intended to fight the proliferation of illegal guns. The removal of the tools such as illegal fire-arms that are used in committing these crimes will go a long way in dealing with this problem of murders. The committee has also emphasised the need for strident strategies to curb gender based violence that continues to be a worrying problem in South Africa. The killing of the six women among the 13 people that were murdered in Philippi, highlights the continuation of the worrying trend of violence against women in the country. “Violence against women remains one of the most repugnant forms of crime in the country and cannot be left unabated” emphasised Ms Joemat-Pettersson. According to Ms Joemat-Pettersson the fight against crime requires a broader approach that must include dealing with unemployment, poverty and the scourge of substance abuse. “We must be aware that this challenge is not purely a policing matter, but one that calls for active participation of all South Africans to fight crime” added Joemat-Pettersson. The committee calls on the society in general to assist the police with information that will lead to the arrest and successful prosecution of the perpetrators of the Philippi murders. Furthermore, the committee calls for the entrenchment of the culture of cooperation between SAPS and members of the community to win the war against crime. The committee extends its heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims of the Philippi murders. Issued by Malatswa Molepo on behalf of Parliamentary Communication Services, 9 July 2019