FF Plus wins DA ward – sign of continuing growth in support 11 April 2019 The results of the by-elections that were held in Ward 30 of the Matlosana Local Municipality (Stilfontein) serve as proof that support for the FF Plus continues to grow. The FF Plus won the Ward, which was previously under DA-control. The party won 56% of the votes and won more votes than all the other parties that participated in the elections put together. This confirms the tendency that became apparent in the recent national elections, where voters showed that they prefer the FF Plus as an alternative to the DA. The residents of Ward 30 voted for better service delivery and the FF Plus's promise of hope and strong opposition against the ANC. These results prove that the FF Plus is the growing alternative and it is a clear indication of voters' confidence in the party. The FF Plus listens to its supporters and then takes decisive action in their interest. Mr Fanie Kloppers was elected as ward councillor. He is passionate about the community and will surely put the interests of residents first. During the recent national elections, the party's support more than doubled and the results of the by-elections show that the party's support is continuing to grow and that the FF Plus will be a significant role player in the 2021 municipal elections. The FF Plus's support increased with 34 percentage points in the by-elections, while the DA's support decreased with 35%. The number of votes for the FF Plus increased with 43%. The DA lost 72% of its votes since the 2016 municipal elections. Winning this Ward strengthens the hand of the FF Plus in opposing the ANC in Matlosana. The FF Plus wants to thank every voter who put their confidence in the party with their vote yesterday as it is indeed the growing alternative that will bring about real change. The increased support reinforces the party's mandate to promote its policy and bring about change for the better. Issued by Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 11 July 2019