Minister Fritz Condemns Rampant Philippi Murders 8 July 2019 The Minister of Community Safety, Albert Fritz, has condemned in the strongest terms, the rampant killings which occurred in Philippi and elsewhere on the Cape Flats over the weekend. On Friday night, six women between the ages of 18 and 26 years were murdered at a residence in the Marcus Garvey community, Philippi East. Police have confirmed that unknown gunmen entered the home at 22:55 and opened fire on the victims. On Saturday evening an additional five men, aged 18 to 39, were shot dead and one was injured in two separate shooting incidents in Philippi. A further two individuals were shot dead in Hanover Park and one in Delft. Minister Fritz said, “Between midnight Friday and 06:00 today, there were 55 unnatural deaths which resulted from gunshot wounds and sharp objects in the Province, 33 of which were in the Metro West region. We are indeed facing a crisis. In June 2018, there were 344 alleged murder admissions; however, in June 2019, there were 448. Of the 448 admissions, 369 were in the Metro. The figures are deeply chilling and it is for this reason that I have called on SANDF to be immediately deployed to our communities. In the past, communities have called for a state of emergency and this is something that the National Government needs to consider in a bid to bring peace to the area.” “I commend the SAPS on their urgent response to the murders that took place in Philippi. They have launched a 72-hour action plan in response to the killings. The plan entails a lock-down and operations in the area that are conducted by public order police, the K9 Unit and Flying Squad members. In this regard, the Western Cape Government will continue to work closely with SAPS, and continue to provide the necessary oversight.” “I further commend the community who gathered in protest at the Philippi East Police Station calling for police management to intervene and reduce violent crime. We all need to be a part of the conversation on safety in our communities and show that we will not support gangsterism and criminality. The many good people of our province cannot live in perpetual fear of a few.” Minister Fritz further added, “Community members with any information about the shootings are urged to contact the investigating officer Warrant Officer Larry Arnoldus on 079 880 9822 or Crime Stop on 08600 10111.” Under the leadership of the Minister of Community Safety, Albert Fritz, the Department will continue to provide oversight over institutions which safeguard the province. Issued by Cayla Ann Tomás Murray, Spokesperson for Minister Albert Fritz, 8 July 2019