Personal message The National Council of SPCAs has the formidable task of ensuring the nationwide protection of all animal species from abuse, neglect and cruelty. One of the most effective ways to do this, is through the courts. Sadly, in the fight for justice, the plight of animals is often ignored or found at the bottom of the agenda. With the support of the South African people, Adv. Gerrie Nel will take on a high-profile case on behalf of the National Council of SPCAs in respect of inhumane treatment which led to the suffering of defenseless, voiceless animals.  THE CASE: The NSPCA v Thandi Modise. The National Council of SPCAs’ case involves allegations of the gross neglect of animals on Modderfontein farm belonging to Thandi Modise, Former Premier of the North West, ex-President of the ANC Woman’s League, former Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces and currently Speaker of the National Assembly of South Africa. On being alerted to the situation on the farm, officials of the National Council of SPCAs found a gruesome scene of unfed animals left to starve to death after workers abandoned the farm, having not received their wages. Officials were shocked by the sight of about 85 live pigs cannibalizing 58 dead pigs to survive.  Without the provision of water, the pigs had also been forced to drink their own urine. Sheep, geese, goats and ducks were also among the neglected animals found on the farm. By the time the officials had arrived, 80 animals had already died as a result of the lack of food and water. 117 animals had to be humanely euthanised to prevent suffering, and a further 120 animals were rescued from the farm. "It’s the worst farm cruelty that I've come across in the twenty years that I've been with the SPCA. It’s horrific. We're all at a loss for words", said Andries Venter of the National Council of SPCAs. Learn more about this case in the NEWS: Amabhungane News eNCA NUUS Beeld SABC NEWS eNCA SABC NEWS Representing the National Council of SPCAs Adv Gerrie Nel has had a long and distinguished career of 35 years as one of South Africa’s top prosecutors at the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA). He received the International Prosecutors’ Award for his successful prosecution of Jackie Selebi, then South African Police Commissioner and Head of Interpol. He also successfully prosecuted former Paralympic champion, Oscar Pistorius for the murder of Reeva Steenkamp. Advocate Nel is committed to ensuring equality before the law, regardless of an individual’s political connections and position of power. In a fair and just South Africa there can be no selective prosecution. THE REASON FOR CROWDFUNDING: A criminal case of animal cruelty was opened for contravening the Animals Protection Act. Two years later, the State declined to prosecute. Application was successfully made to the Director of Public Prosecution to privately prosecute, allowing for a private prosecution which will be undertaken on a pro amico basis by Adv. Gerrie Nel. A case of this magnitude is estimated to take a minimum of 30 days and can be extremely expensive. This campaign is aimed at raising funds for the “Animal Farm” case to successfully prosecute, raise awareness and to make the point to future perpetrators that no one is above the law, irrespective of political power, money and fame. Be part of meaningful change. A successful prosecution will also help develop case law.  As it stands now, a personal injury must be shown for a private prosecution to take place, Adv. Gerrie Nel wishes to open this up to include the concept that society suffers an injury for every act of corruption as well. HOW YOU CAN GET INVOLVED AND MAKE A CONSTRUCTIVE DIFFERENCE : Donate to this campaign to help cover the legal fees of Non-profit Organisation, the National Council of SPCAs in its case against Thandi Modise. All funds generated by this campaign will be administered by registered Non-profit Organization, BackaBuddy and paid directly to Non-profit Organization, the National Council of SPCAs for costs strictly related to the prosecution of Thandi Modise. All donors qualify for a Section 18A Tax exemption certificate issued by the National Council of SPCAs "We need fellow South Africans to stand with us. As a society, we can no longer stand by and watch powerful individuals abuse their positions to carry out heinous acts without consequence”, says Advocate Nel. TO SUPPORT THIS CAMPAIGN GO TO: https://www.backabuddy.co.za/gerrie-nel-animal-farm