Jubilee is the worst hospital in Gauteng 29 July 2019 The Jubilee Hospital in Hammanskraal is the worst hospital in Gauteng according to responses to the DA’s social media campaign to identify the worst hospitals in Gauteng. Other hospitals mentioned frequently include the Pholosong, Helen Joseph, Far East Rand, Kopanong, South Rand, Tambo Memorial, Bheki Mlangeni, Mamelodi, Sebokeng, Leratong, Rahima Moosa and George Mukhari hospitals. Some comments are as follows: Shibambo Rps - “JUBILEE District Hospital @ Hammanskraal. Go there at 20:00pm, get a file at 05:00am, get assistance at 11:00am. And some bleed the whole night until going mad.” Rudolf Haas - “Pholosong hospital. Tsakane. A abattoir. You go in there alive and come out as a corpse.” Vaughan Rautenbach - “Kopanong Hospital in Vereeniging is one of the worst I've seen. Nothing works and management do not care about the dire conditions.” Tshepo Moloisane - “Why is Bheki Mlangeni not on this list? ppl die by hundreds there each n every month ... even on waiting queues for emergencies.” Hosia Mahlatsi - “Kopanong Hospital was busy transporting to and from Sebokeng Hospital at night because they didn’t have a x-ray scanner. This hospital is a Pre-Mortuary Hospital.” Lehasa Pono Khoele - “Sebokeng Hospital is the worst hospital of them all, I lost my loved ones there due to nurses ignorant ... nxa!” Jackie Cilliers - “Tambo Memorial. Dirty, overcrowded, several staff members lazy, rude and incompetent.” Carine Faure Kruger - “Far East also known as Far Death/Verre Dood.” Silvia du Toit - “Rahima Moosa Mother and Child Hospital - mothers die with their new-born babies. Helen Joseph and many more other hospitals.” Many people said that all of Gauteng’s state hospitals required intervention to provide a decent service. There is still some confusion over the ten hospitals that Gauteng Premier David Makhura and Health MEC Bandile Masuku have targeted for special attention. I hope that clarity is provided tomorrow in the debate in the Gauteng Legislature on the R50.8 billion Gauteng Health Budget. Issued by Jack Bloom, DA Gauteng Shadow Health MEC, 29 July 2019