STATEMENT OF THE ANC NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE HELD ON FROM 26-29 JULY 2019 The ANC National Executive Committee (NEC) met in its regular session from 26-29 July 2019 at St Georges Hotel, Tshwane. The NEC meeting took place two months after the national and provincial elections, when the ANC 's mandate was renewed as a government of choice at national level and in eight provinces. The NEC Lekgotla from 1-3 June 2019 set out the overarching governance priorities for this term of office based on the ANC Manifesto and Conference resolutions, building on and learning lessons from the first 25 years of democracy. Cabinet held its own Lekgotla and translated the priorities into governrnent's Medium-Term Strategic Framework (2019-2024), as reflected in the State of the Nation Address and the Budget votes of the Executive. The successful implementation of this programme of government, depends on an African National Congress that is united. focused and with the capacity to mobilise society behind the mission of a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa. The NEC therefore addressed the unity, renev.'al and capacity of the ANC, in the context of this mission, the Current economic situation confronting our nation, and the expectation of the people that we must speed up transformation. SPEEDING UP RADICAL SOCIO-ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION We woke up this morning on the announcement that the official unemployment rate has risen to 29%. This continues to be the single most important challenge facing our nation. The NEC agreed that among the most critical tasks of the organisation, as we continue to build a non-racial, non-sexism is therefore to place the economy on an inclusive and higher growth trajectory, create employment, strengthen local government and improve service delivery. On Economic Transformation I. The NEC received presentations on the current State of the economy. It discussed the structure of the economy, including monopolies in various sectors, the state of manufacturing, investments, black economic empowerment, as well as sustainable job creation. 2. It noted with concern the poor performance of the economy. With continued job losses, and serious challenges in critical state-owned enterprises. This has a dire impact on poor households, the middle class, women and young people, who bear the brunt of structural unemployment, inequality and poverty. 3. NEC also received an update on the implementation of the Economic Stimulus and Recovery Plan. including targets set, announced by government in 2018. It urged government at all levels to move faster in the implementation of the package of measures, and to monitor and report on a regular basis to the NEC. 4. The NEC called on government to also consider other urgent measures to accelerate radical socio-economic transformation, through inclusive growth and employment creation, involving all social partners. This includes prioritising the reimagined industrial strategy in identified priority Sectors, micro and macro-economic policy measurers, tackling the monopolistic structure of the economy, land reform and agro-processing, a carbon-efficient economy, fourth industrial revolution sectors, improving the ease of doing business and investments in infrastructure, township and rural economies. S. The NEC expressed grave concern about the continued job losses, and urge government and all social partners to address this process by implementing the 2018 Job Summit Agreement, such measures as the Temporary Employee/Employer Relieve Scheme (TERS), to be used by companies in distress as a means of financial relief to retain jobs and reskill workers. Government and social partners are also urged to report on urgent measures to tackle the problem of unemployment, especially youth unemployment. 6. The ANC calls on all its members, supporters and all South Africans, to be part of this national effort to accelerate inclusive growth and transformation, through small and medium businesses, cooperatives, artisanships, social entrepreneurship, innovative enterprise development and other measurers, as well as engagement with businesses and entrepreneurs in other African countries, so that we make use of the opportunities of the African Continental Free Trade Area. On the SA Reserve Bank, the NEC reaffirmed the 54th National Conference resolution to return the sovereignty of this important national institution to the people of South Africa as a whole. The NEC emphasised the policy positions of the ANC on the independence and mandate of the South African Reserve Bank as set out in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, with its mandate to be exercised in regular consultations with government. 8. The NEC welcomed government's decision to provide financial assistance to Eskom to address its liquidity challenges, with the understanding that the entity should proceed With reorganizing to improve efficiency and transparency while safeguarding jobs and livelihoods. 9. The NEC appreciated Cabinet's approval of the policy for the licensing of the high demand spectrum, which have a significant impact on the cost and availability of broadband services. 10. The NEC noted and supported the process by government to deal with the matter of ex-tolls so that it is resolved amicably and expeditiously. The NEC re-affirms the user-pay principle in dealing with the financing of major infrastructure. 11. The NEC Will remain seized with these and other economic and transformation challenges and opportunities at each of its meetings. On Land reform 12. The NEC re-affirmed ANC resolutions on accelerated land reform and its commitment to a mix of State, communal and private ownership of land. The NEC welcomed the establishment of the Parliamentary Ad Hoc Committee tasked with the amendment to Section 25 of the Constitution to allow for expropriation of land without compensation, and urged the committee to complete its work by the end of this year. 13. The NEC welcomed the report of the Presidential Advisory Panel on Land Reform and Agriculture, which made comprehensive recommendations on the transformation of agriculture, rural and urban land reform, and spatial transformation. The NEC encourages government to move swiftly towards the implementation of the Panel's recommendations. 14. The NEC noted that a key part of the stimulus package is support to over 250000 small scale and emerging farmers, and that this support must be implemented in a targeted, developmental and transparent manner. 15. The NEC also notes that the review of the Land Claims Court has started, as per the ANC 2018 Land Summit recommendation and NEC decision on the matter. On basic services and local government 16. The NEC welcomed the commitment of government to visit every district during this term of office. The focus on the district level as a point of delivery should ensure improvements in the delivery of infrastructure, water and sanitation, education and health, human settlements, decentralised economic development and job creation, and safer communities. 17. The state of local government remains an issue of concern, and the ANC will convene a special two-day NEC to pay attention to this critical sphere of government and improving the delivery of effective and affordable basic services. 18. The NEC welcomes the finalisation of the National Health Insurance Bill by Cabinet, the establishment of an NHI War room and the signing of a Health Compact between government and various sectors of society, 19. The ANC welcomes the extraordinary measures to deal with gang violence and violent crimes on the Cape Flats, including the deployment of the SANDF. The levels of crime across the country, including gender-based violence, must remain a priority concern of government and all sectors of our society. 20. The NEC instructed all its deployee5 in government, from national to provincial and local levels, to deal with issues expeditiously, to be focused and diligent in the implementation of programrnes, and to engage the people and relevant sectors. RENEWAL AND UNITY OF THE ANC 21. The NEC had extensive discussions on strengthening the organisation, accelerating renewal and unity, and building collective leadership, so that the movement becomes a more effective instrument for radical socio-economic transformation, and uniting and serving the people and the country. 22. The NEC welcomed the progress made in implementing the 54th National Conference instruction on a sustained programme of renewal and unity, which was evident in the establishment of the effective organisational machinery responsible for the ANC's victory in the 2019 elections. 23. The NEC recognised, that there is certain persistent behaviour, particularly at leadership levels, which undermines this programme. These include factionalism, untested and wild accusations, use of social media to attack each other and policy positions of the ANC, leaks to media and taking the organisation to court without first exhausting internal processes. 24. The NEC further noted and strongly condemned the use of intimidation, violence and even killings, to access positions in the ANC and government, resources and patronage. 25. The NEC reaffirmed the urgent renewal tasks from national conference to strengthen branches as agents of development and social cohesion in communities. In this regard: a) The NEC welcomed progress With the implementation of the new membership system, Which Will go live before the end of 2019, allowing for members to join and renew online and to manage their own membership, This Will assist in addressing gate-keeping, bulk buying of membership and corruption. b) The NEC adopted the organisational Programme of Action, Which has specific external and internal tasks for ANC branches. These include the need for branches to build a direct relationship with the people and regular contact through door-to-door work in all communities. They need to respond to local needs and work with government and civil society to address problems. Branches are expected to participate fully in democratic ANC elections and decision-making on policy. They need to recruit people who can contribute to the ANCs mission, and deploy members to participate in community activities. c) The meeting adopted a mass political education programme targeting at least 50,011) cadres over three years, to be implemented through the OR Tambo School of Leadership. In line with the 54th National Conference resolution on the review of our internal party electoral systems, the NEC agreed to review the 'Through the Eye of a Needle' document so that we improve our internal electoral system, including internal rules and regulations for lobbying and funding of individual campaigns for leadership. e) Since its mandate has come to an end, the NEC dissolved the ANC Youth League NEC, and appointed a National Youth Task Team to oversee the process of rebuilding of the ANCYL, of implementing a programme of action, working With the Progressive Youth Alliance and other youth formations, and organise a successful National Congress of the ANCYL by not later than 31 January 2020. f) As we embark on Women's month, we recognize that we are a society whose Constitution commits us to build a non-sexist society. Over the last 2S years, we have made strides towards the emancipation of women. At the same time, as we continue to fight to dismantle of patriarchy and fight misogyny, we must tackle gender-based violence, the economic and social exclusion of women, equal pay for equal work and the empowerment of women in all spheres of society. g) The ANC as a leader of society is the only party with a gender parity policy, and which integrates non-sexism in all its policies, leadership structures and programmes. The NEC at this meeting adopted the ANC Policy on Sexual Harassment in the Work Environment, and further agreed to adopt a broader organisation-wide Sexual Harassment policy. h) The NEC took a decisive Step forward in the implementation of 54th National Conference resolution on the urgent unity of umkhonto we Sizwe veterans. The NEC established a joint structure of MKMVA and MK Council, to audit and verify all former MK veterans, to organise an inclusive national conference and to champion the welfare needs of former combatants. The joint structure will act as the only public voice of veterans in the build-up to Conference, and will oversee and organize all conferences of MK veterans, i) The NEC noted that the ANC in the North West remains weak, divided and unstable, which has impacted on governance. The NEC agreed to dissolve the PEC, whose mandate has come to an end. and appointed a Provincial Interim Committee in accordance with the Constitution, to implement the process of renewal and rebuilding. j) The NEC noted that the SGO and Chief Whips are finalising the deployment of its public representatives at provincial and national levels to parliamentary constituency offices (PCO), The process will ensure that we have an ANC PCO in every municipality, so that MPs and MPLS do regular constituency clinics, the PCOs act as advise offices, and engage with citizens and communities to help resolve problems. PCOS must also help educate communities about their rights, about new legislation and services of government. k) The NEC welcomes the celebration this year of the centenary anniversary of the birth of cde Sefako Mapogo Makgatho Who served as the second president of the ANC from 1924 to 1927. He was co-founder of the Transvaal African Teachers Association (TATA), as well as co-founder political journal The Native Advocate and Abantu Batho. As President of the Transvaal Congress and an NEC member of the SANNC, Makgatho was enraged by the passing of the Land Act of 1913. which he believed was "fraught with the most momentous issues, as it infringes on the common rights of the people.". The NEC encourages all our Structures to organize memorial lectures and other activities on the life of this giant of our struggle. l) The NEC confirmed that disciplinary processes need to be implemented consistently, and that any leader or member Who contravenes ANC policies and protocols shall face due process in line With the ANC Constitution, Without fear or favour. m) The issue of allegations against Cde Derek Hanekom was also raised in the meeting. The NEC referred the matter to officials for processing, n) The NEC urged the law enforcement agencies to act decisively on political killings, as serious acts of criminality. The NEC also notes the increase in taxi violence and murders, which also required a coordinated response by the relevant agencies and government. 26. The NEC noted that some opposition parties, due to their poverty of ideas and lack of clear programmes, are attempting to set the agenda of the ANC. They do so through wild allegations and 'stink bombs', in order to try to distract us from our programme of transformation. The NEC vowed not to be diverted, and call On Our members to remain vigilant so that we don't allow opposition to further divisions in our movement. 27. The ANC recognized that the people of South Africa are very interested in the outcomes of its deliberations, as leader of transformation and governing party. It is therefore concerning that the media continues to mispresent its discussions and meetings, using faceless sources. The NEC remains committed to dealing with the media in an open and constructive manner, and expects the same courtesy in return. ON ETHICAL AND CLEAN GOVERNANCE 28. The NEC reaffirmed its commitment to strengthen ethical and clean government, and to fight corruption and state capture, as per our 54th National Conference resolutions, it noted the proceedings of the Zondo Commission and reaffirmed its position that the ANC will not give running commentary on evidence before the Commission. The NEC reaffirmed its previous position that all its members should cooperate with the Commission. The ANC has and will at appropriate times make its own submissions to the Commission. 29. The NEC noted that the work of the Commission is still in progress and that the veracity of many of the allegations have still to be tested, and called on all South Africans to allow the Commission to conclude its processes and called on law enforcement agencies to act as required in an urgent and fair manner, 30. The NEC revised the terms of reference of the Integrity Commission to enable it to call on ANC members and leaders to appear before it. to enable members to present themselves to the Commission and to strengthen the Commission's investigative capacity. 31. The NEC noted the various recent reports of the Public Protector affecting some of its leaders and the fact that these have been taken on judicial review. The meeting affirmed its principled Support for the office of public protector, Other Chapter 9 institutions and the judiciary. ON INTERNATIONAL MATTERS 32. The NEC reaffirmed its commitment to the African agenda, appreciated South Africa's election to chair the African Union in 2020, welcomed the coming into force of the African Continental Free Trade Area and urged government and all sectors for society to prepare for the opportunities of the world's largest common market. 33. The NEC reiterated the irnportance ofSouth-South Cooperation as part of our struggle for global peace and a more just global System. 34. The NEC reaffirmed the Conference resolution on solidarity with Western Sahara and Palestine and congratulated the Cuban government and people on their celebrations this year of 60 years of the Cuban revolution and of the 26 July movement led by the young Fidel Castro 35. The NEC confirmed its commitment to our national climate change obligations, with a just transition, as responsible global citizens. CONCLUSION The NEC calls on all leaders and members of the ANC to maintain unity, discipline and embark on renewal, so that it focusses all its energy on building a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa, and the struggle for a better Africa and world. The NEC committed to put shoulder to wheel in the spirit of Thurma Mina and Khawuleza to lead and focus, in order to ensure that we decisively and immediately tackle hunger; that we speed up economic development and growth; create employment for young people: improve education outcomes in the context of a skills revolution; and deal With gender-based violence and violent crime so we build safer communities. Issued by the Secretary General, Cde Ace Magashule, 30 July 2019 ANNEXURES TO NEC STATEMENT Annexure 1 List of National Youth Task Team Thandi Maharnbehlala (Convenor) Sibongile Besani (Coordinator Collen Maine Thandi Moroka Desmond Moela Njabulo Nzuza Reggie Nkabinde ANCYL Provincial Chairpersons ANCYL Provincial Secretaries Dakota Legoete (M) Ziti Kodwa (M) pule Mabe (M) Faith Muthambi (F) Nomvula Mokonyane (F) Ronald Lamola (M) Undiwe Zulu (F) Nathi Mthethwa (M) David Masondo (M) Pinky Kekana (F) Fébé Potgieter (F) Senzo Mchunu (M) Lulu Johnson (M) Malusi Gigaba (M) Fikile Mbalula (M) Annexure 2. NORTH WEST PROVINCIAL INTERIM COMMITTEE Cde Susan Djantje (Convenor) Cde Patrick Chauke ( Coordinator) Cde Supra Mah umapelo Cde Kenetsoe Mosenogi Cde China Dodovu Cde Sello Lehari Cde Motlaepule Rosho Cde Saliva Molapisi Cde Nono Maloyi Cde Rose Diphoko Cde Nteseng Montewa Cde Maitu Kgaile Cde Sophie Maine Cde Lerato Terna Cde Bridgette Tlhomelang Cde Bitsa Lenkopane Cde Jojo Matlala Cde Oj Tselapedi Cde Noni Kgabi Cde Manketsi Tlape Cde Philly Mapulane Cde Wendy Matsemela Cde Kenny Morolong Cde Lena Miga Cde Zakes Tolo Cde Bushy Mape Cde Wendy Nelson Cde Gordon Kegakilwe Cde Job Mokgoro (Ex-officio) Ex-officio: ANCYL (Chairperson and Secretary), ANCWL (Chairperson and Secretary). ANCVL (Chairperson and Secretary ANC ENDS