June performance stats reveal JMPD crackdown on dangerous driving offences 22 July 2019 Today, 22 July 2019, the June performance statistics by the Johannesburg Metropolitan Police Department (JMPD) were released, showing top crime types across the City of Johannesburg as well as top arrest per region and per unit, including the K9 Narcotics and Tactical Unit and the newly launched IIOC Reaction Unit. These monthly performance statistics allow JMPD to reflect on its operations and allows it to identify trends throughout the City. It is also used as a tool to communicate JMPD’s crime fighting efforts to residents. Whilst driving under the influence of alcohol remains the top concern across the City, the 11 recorded deaths on Joburg freeways indicate the importance of JMPD enforcing speed and other related regulations. This is further strengthened by the recorded 848 280 auto speed enforcement offences, regardless of increased visible policing. This is unacceptable and the endangerment of lives through reckless driving, driving under the influence of alcohol and speeding cannot be the order of the day. Drunk driving monitored cases by the Cases Monitoring Unit (CMU) revealed that a total of 580 drunk drivers were apprehended and taken to the neatest police station in June. All of these suspects were found to have paid between R500 and R1 500 bail, and were subsequently released. Furthermore, the newly launched Integrated Intelligence Operation Centre (IIOC) Reaction Unit, which focuses on crimes through CCTV monitoring specifically in the inner city, made over 50 arrests for crimes relating to robbery, hijacking, theft, as well as being in possession of unlicensed firearms. What has unfortunately become apparent is that a large portion of these arrests were of undocumented persons, who are still in police custody pending verification of identification and address. JMPD also continues to remove illegal water and electricity meters every month. In June alone, over 300 illegally connected metres were removed. Whilst it seems that these monthly performance statistics do paint a rather grim picture of crime in Johannesburg, the swift and effective action by our brave JMPD officers does not go unnoticed. I therefore look forward to the end of October when we will introduce the first of the 1500 JMPD recruits. With a strengthened force and a simple and clear objective to stop crime and enforce the law, the City of Johannesburg is turning the tide against crime. We need zero-tolerance policing, and to deal decisively with offenders. Restoring the rule of law must be apriority for all of us. Finally, I would like to thank each and every law enforcement officer within JMPD. You are appreciated and you have a huge role to play, and I thank you for doing so with pride. I would also like to remind residents to use the correct reporting channels when reporting crime. This will ensure that we can deploy our resources timeously and effectively. Residents can report illegal activities to the following numbers: - Anti-Corruption Hotline: 0800 203 712; - Traffic Management Hotline: 080 872 3342; - JMPD Emergency number: 011 375 5911 / 011 758 9620; and - Illegal Dumping: 082 779 1361 (WhatsApp or SMS along with clear photos). Issued by Chantelle Fourie-Shawe, Media Specialist: Office of the Executive Mayor, 22 July 2019