Mpumalanga learners must brace themselves for another year without textbooks 26 July 2019 It has come to the Democratic Alliance’s (DA) attention that the Mpumalanga Department of Education will not procure any textbooks for learners in 2019/2020 financial year despite the fact that many learners from Grade 8 to Grade 12 have been without textbooks and were forced to share textbooks for more than a year. In a recent report by the Finance Portfolio Committee on the Mpumalanga appropriation bill for the 2019/2020 financial year that the department has budgeted R320 million for textbooks in this financial year, but will not procure such materials because of accruals from previous years. The reason given for not buying new textbooks in 2019/2020 financial year is that: “the department’s budget was insufficient and it is underfunded by over R1.1 billion (R1 160 000 000). The department also reported nearly R1.7 million accruals from the previous financial year which needs to be settled.” The Mpumalanga Department of Education's overall budget for 2019/2020 is R21.8 billion. The department's reasoning boggles the mind, taking into account that the department surrendered an amount of R171 million to National Treasury due to slow implementation of infrastructure projects. During previous oversight inspections to schools, the Portfolio Committee on Education; Culture, Sport and Recreation found that many schools in Mpumalanga had severe shortages of textbooks. It was also noted that in schools such as Thembeka High in KaNyamazane and Mashishini Secondary in Mashishing (formerly Lydenburg), learners in Grade 8 to 12 have been without textbooks or had to make plans to share textbooks for more than a year. The department itself confirmed that new textbooks in all subjects and grades were last supplied to learners between 2011 and 2014. The department further acknowledged that they do not have a strategy of retrieving textbooks issued to learners. By not ensuring that every single learner in Mpumalanga has enough textbooks, Education MEC Bonakele Majuba is violating thousands of learners’ right to education as basic human right goes hand in hand with the provision of textbooks. The DA reported this matter to the Human Rights Commission in 2018 and the investigation is ongoing. The DA has submitted new evidence to the Human Rights Commission to assist the Commission with its investigation. The Education Department has truly abandoned learners in Mpumalanga as not only do they have to contend with unsafe school structures and inadequate sanitation facilities, they also have to deal with limited access to textbooks. While the Human Rights Commission investigates this gross violation of learners’ rights, the DA will continue to monitor the provision of textbooks in Mpumalanga schools to ensure that no learner is left behind in our mission to build One South Africa for All. Issued by Jane Sithole, DA Mpumalanga Spokesperson on Education, 26 July 2019