Failing ANC has ditched its founding values for Ace’s corrupt cabal 3 May 2019 It is quite clear that even with President Cyril Ramaphosa in the driving seat, the failing ANC will never self-correct and can only take South Africa down a slippery slope. This is a party that continues to steal from people oppressed by poverty and puts itself first. The corrupt cabal in the ANC no longer espouses the principles of equality, non-racialism and non-sexism which were championed by its founding members. The current ANC kowtows to the outrageous demands of the shameless Gupta family, current Secretary General Ace Magashule and the politically connected few with the sole intention of bleeding the country’s resources dry. The callousness with which the likes of Magashule have governed this country into the ground knows no bounds. The failing ANC rewards corruption, incompetence and those who oppress the poor, and this is evident in the list of the people they intend to send to parliament to continue stealing from the poor and further collapse state departments. It boggles the mind why the ANC has not taken decisive action against its corrupt leaders such as Ace Magashule and Members of the Executive who are heavily implicated in Bosasa scandals and State Capture.  If South Africans are sick and tired of corruption, lawlessness and growing unemployment, the 8th of May is a chance for them to vote for change. South Africa is desperately in need of a government that looks after its people, safeguards their future and always puts their needs first. Embarking on protests and destructing public property will not bring about the change they need. What South Africans must do is vote for the DA as we have demonstrated where we govern that we provide adequate services, create an enabling environment for economic growth and provide jobs. DA is the only party that respects the rule of law and embraces the principles of equality; one South Africa for all. The DA is ready to bring Change that Builds One South Africa for All. Issued by Patricia Kopane, DA Free State Premier Candidate, 3 May 2019