FF Plus consolidates growth with expert and experienced team of Members of Parliament 15 May 2019 The FF Plus has consolidated its extraordinary growth at the polls with an expert and experienced team of Members of Parliament and office bearers to represent the interests of the party's supporters on the highest political platforms. Among the ten Members of Parliament, three have doctorate degrees (Dr Pieter Groenewald, leader of the FF Plus, Dr Corné Mulder, leader in the Western Cape and Dr Wynand Boshoff, leader in the Northern Cape). There are also two graduates in the team, one of which is a practising attorney (Heloïse Jordaan). As a team, these Members of Parliament possess expertise on all three levels of government – local, provincial and national. The team offers a good mix of youth and experience, while women are representing the FF Plus in Parliament for the first time. They are Heloïse Jordaan and Tammy Wessels, the party's Youth Leader. The leader of the FF Plus, Dr Pieter Groenewald is a seasoned politician who served as mayor from 1988 and who became a Member of Parliament in 1989. In addition, he also served as a member of the provincial Legislature in the North West province for two years (1999 to 2001) and, thus, he has experience on all three levels of government. He has a B. Juris degree, a master's degree in management and development and a doctorate in political studies. The theme of his thesis is the South African National Electoral system – a Critical Analysis and Alternatives. At present, he is also the longest serving member of Parliament's Portfolio Committee for Police. The complete list of Members of Parliament is as follows: Dr Pieter Groenewald Dr Corné Mulder Mr Wouter Wessels Mr Phillip van Staden Dr Wynand Boshoff Mr Jaco Mulder Mrs Tammy Wessels Mr Piet Mey Mr Michal Groenewald Ms Heloise Jordaan Members of the National Council of Provinces: Mr Fanie du Toit (North West) Mr Armand Cloete (Free State) Members of the provincial legislatures: Mr Peter Marais (Western Cape) Mr Theo Coetzee (Eastern Cape) Mr Danie Coetzee (Northern Cape) Mr Werner Weber (Mpumalanga) Ms Marcelle Maritz (Limpopo) Adv Anton Alberts (Gauteng) Ms Amanda de Lange (Gauteng) Mr Kobus Hoffman (Gauteng) Mr De Wet Nel (North West) Mr Erns Kleynhans (North West) Mr Devar Smit (Free State) Issued by Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader , 15 May 2019