IFP concerned about appointment of unqualified MECs and the recycling of disreputable characters 27 May 2019 The IFP in KwaZulu-Natal welcomed the announcement of a new provincial cabinet by the newly appointed Premier, Sihle Zikalala. The IFP also welcome the issues raised by the Premier as priority issues. Throughout the Campaign, the IFP raised five key issues as top and priority issues ; Creating the growing economy to create job opportunities, provision of quality health care services, quality education, provision of better housing programme and the fight against crime and corruption. We commend him also for paying tribute to the first Premier of KwaZulu-Natal from the IFP Dr FT Mdlalose and all who followed him for He ( Dr FT Mdlalose) laid a solid foundation of this Province under the new dispensation after 1994. The IFP commits itself in working together with the ruling Party to take the Province of KZN forward. However, the IFP is concerned about the appointment of some unfit and unqualified individuals into critical departments. The appointment of Hon Mr Kwazi Mshengu as the MEC for education leaves much to be desired. His experience and qualifications make him not equal to the deep challenges experienced by the education department. Again the appointment of Ms Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu into Health Department is a big challenge. The Health department is a critical department servicing many people and experiencing so many challenges. Ms Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu will not have command and authority in the medical field. We are of the opinion that the Premier compromised these two departments. We also flag the MEC for COGTA Mr Sipho Hlomuka. The Local Government is in deep crisis, protests almost daily and section 139 interventions one after the other. We appreciate and support the key role to be played by young people in the Cabinet but the interest of the people of KZN should not be compromised with people lacking relevant experience and expertise. Again the recycling of compromised Mrs Peggy Nkonyeni into Human Settlements Department is a big mistake. The re-appointment of Peggy Nkonyeni is a fatal compromise that undermines the integrity of Premier Zikalala’s stated commitment that he made last week during the swearing of new members where he promised to fight corruption and help improve Education and Health. There is no doubt that Simelane-Zulu is absolutely unfit to be Health MEC. The struggle for social equality, jobs, quality education, health care and decent sustainable housing can no longer be led by unfit, unqualified, inexperienced, compromised and ineffective people. The selection of Miss Peggy Nkonyeni (Human Settlement) and other recycled old MECs speak volumes about the principles and pragmatics that continue to drive the ANC leadership in this province. It is increasingly clear that while the ANC is good at talking about cleansing itself by eradicating corrupt and compromised leaders, it lacks the credible leadership to drive the “New-Era of Thuma -Mina”. There is also a strong lack of will and the commitment to prove itself that it can tackle issues of this province with urgency. To this day we still expecting the National Prosecuting Authority to disclose why it had dropped the criminal charges in the R144 million ‘Amigos’ corruption and racketeering trial against Peggy Nkonyeni and Mike Mabuyakhulu in October 2015. Issued by Velenkosini Hlabisa, Leader of the Official Opposition in KZN,27 May 2019