Western Cape has the largest number of households earning salaries 28 May 2019 The StatsSA General Household Survey, released today shows that the Western Cape has the largest number of households that earned salaries in the country in 2018, with 77.4% of households reporting earning salaries. The province was also one of only two in the country, where more than two thirds of the population reported a salary as their main source of income. Premier Alan Winde said: “This is an important indicator that our work to drive job creation in this province is paying off. We cannot be complacent when it comes to people’s livelihoods and we will continue our efforts to grow the economy and develop new jobs. This is the reason for establishing an economic war room in my office, so that growing business, investment and jobs remains a top priority during my term.” The survey data also shows that the Western Cape leads in the provision of services such as water, electricity and sanitation. According to the survey, residents have rated the quality of electrical services in the Western Cape highest, with 84.5% of residents indicating the service was “good”. This also represents an increase from 2010, when 81.6% of residents reported they were happy with the service. The Western Cape also had the highest proportion of households with access to piped or tap water, at 98.7% and the lowest number of water interruptions. Internet access at home was also the highest in the province, with 25.8% of residents able to access internet from their homes. In total, over 72% of residents have access to the internet, either at home, work or at a government building, internet café or free WiFi site. Premier Winde said: “The province has been driving the roll out of broadband across the province to ensure that our residents have access at schools and government sites like Youth Cafes and libraries, and are able to access the internet in their communities. Research has shown that internet access and economic growth are closely linked and we will continue to deliver this service to residents.” The survey also found that the Western Cape had the highest percentage (5.8%) of people using trains as their primary mode of transport, however, this had shown a decline from 2017 when 9.3% of the population made use of them. “The decline shows that people are losing faith in our rail system, which is both unsafe and unreliable. Residents of the Western Cape deserve a reliable rail system which they can use without fear and I have committed to ensuring that this happens. I look forward to the announcement of the new national cabinet, so that we can start engaging the minister responsible for transport on these issues.” Premier Winde said. Issued by Bianca Capazorio on behalf of Western Cape Economic Development and Tourism, 28 May 2019