Cape Town metro leads again as most trusted in South Africa 3 May 2019 The City of Cape Town has again been shown as the leader as it pertains to citizen trust and satisfaction in South Africa. This is according to the latest South African Customer Satisfaction Index (SA-csi) which was conducted by Consulta. In a statement that was issued by SA-csi earlier today, 2 May 2019, it mentioned: ‘Cape Town has once again emerged as the Category leader on overall Citizen Satisfaction for Large Metros for the sixth consecutive year, at 64.1 out of a possible 100. This is a definitive 10.1 index point score above the average satisfaction score of 54 …’ It further states: ‘Cape Town remains the undisputed leader in terms of satisfaction scores year-on-year, albeit with a marginal drop of 1.1 index points compared with 2018. What is notable is that the gap between Cape Town and all other metros continues to widen. Cape Town also has the smallest gap between what citizens expect and what they perceive in terms of actual delivery.’ As per the SA-csi statement, Professor Adré Schreuder, SA-csi Founder and Chairperson said: ‘When you look at what the drivers are behind satisfaction levels, citizen mentions mostly related to basics such as water supply and management, electricity supply, garbage disposal, road maintenance and clean streets as the basics of what citizens expect from their local municipality, and fundamentally why local governments exist, yet these are the areas that citizens most flag as their pain points. It is clear from the SA-csi results that in certain municipalities, service delivery is not the priority for the municipality, or that there are constraints in key areas that need to be addressed more effectively. Municipal leadership would do well to realise that service delivery is what matters most to citizens and that citizens want their lives to be enhanced and improved through the services that municipalities are required to provide.’ While we are very pleased to once again be at the top of the list of metros that residents are most satisfied with, we know we have lots of work to do. I want to hear from our residents where we need to do better so that we can improve their satisfaction levels for the next year. I am fully committed to improving service delivery for our residents. The City continues to do its utmost to enhance service delivery out of respect for its residents and ratepayers. We remain absolutely committed to being a well-run administration and one that is accountable to our residents and businesses. According to the latest Annual Report (2017/18) across the metro 97,3% of our households that the City supplies have access to electricity, 98,4% have access to refuse removal and 94,3% have access to sanitation. Issued by Greg Wagner, Spokesperson to the Executive Mayor, 3 May 2019