I will continue to serve the African continent 30 May 2019 My fellow South Africans, Thank you for allowing me the pleasure of diligently serving you for the past 25 years, it has been my honour and privilege to do my part for our nation. As the longest serving Minster in post-apartheid South Africa, having first served under Nelson Mandela, I am aware of the confidence and trust that was bestowed upon me as I served the people of this country. Since 1994 I have worked alongside every post-apartheid president and fulfilled my duty as a minister in key portfolios such as Public Works, Public Enterprises, Transport, Health, Justice and Constitutional Development, Energy, as well as the Presidency. Over the years, I have had incredible experiences and adventures, built up extraordinary collaborations which have turned into lifelong friendships, for which I am so thankful. In everything that I have done, I have tried to serve our country honourably, ethically, humbly, and more importantly, justly. There is no doubt that our country has had its fair share of challenges, however, when we, the people of this great nation, come together, we come out stronger as a united front and a unified country. This is because we have never let go of the belief that has guided us, as Tata Mandela said, “As we let our own light shine, we unconsciously give other people permission to do the same.” It is this conviction that has allowed us to change this country for the better. I have full confidence that our newly inaugurated administration, led by the honourable President Cyril Ramaphosa, will continue to guide South Africa to a more prosperous future where everyone, despite their ethnicity, culture or creed, will have equal opportunities. It is my hope that as a servant to this great nation, that my love for South Africa and her people was evident in all that I have accomplished. As I pass on the mantle to my colleagues, I have no doubt that they will continue to serve and to carry the torch of democracy proudly, honourably and diligently to the benefit of our country and the continent as a whole. I will forever be a proud ambassador for South Africa and look forward to continuing my efforts in building the African continent. Your faithful servant, Jeff Radebe