KZN Cabinet: Premier Zikalala announces ‘Desperate Executive’ 27 May 2019 The Democratic Alliance regards the recently announced KZN Cabinet – led by newly-elected Premier Sihle Zikalala - as little more than a ‘desperate’ Executive, hastily cobbled together after the ANC’s recent hiding at the polls in the province. The elections, which saw the ANC in the KZN Legislature lose 10 seats, along with the new Cabinet make-up, show all the signs of a party that has realised it is in trouble and which is scrambling to regain lost ground. Of particular concern to the DA is the return of former CoGTA MEC, Nomusa Dube-Ncube – now EDTEA MEC - who still remains under a cloud of suspicion over her husband’s business interests within KZN municipalities. That she has now been handed the ultimate ‘jobs for pals’ portfolio is alarming. With the collapse of both Msunduzi and eThekwini also under her watch, this is one MEC who should not have returned and one can only wonder what she will bring to her critical new role. Then there is Human Settlements MEC, Peggy Nkonyeni, back again five years after being banished presumably after her name was linked to the ‘Amigo’ tender scam. Why she has now been allowed back into the fold is questionable. Another dubious appointment is the return, yet again, of Bongi Sithole-Moloi -now KZN’s Agriculture MEC - after she was fired as Mayor of Richmond in 2008 for bringing the municipality to its knees. Yet another questionable appointment is that of Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu as Health MEC when she has no experience in this area. The reality though, is that in spite of all the new faces within Zikalala’s cabinet - and the promises they will undoubtedly make – KZN will not move forward without the creation of a capable state. This means that until such time as there is proper governance and consequence management, cadres who have been deployed based on political affiliation rather than merit will continue to abuse the system. Whether Premier Zikalala and his new Cabinet will rise to the challenge of creating a capable state remains to be seen. The DA, as the only effective opposition in the province, will however continue to hold the new Premier and his ANC executive to account - without fear or favour - while tabling sustainable solutions to the many challenges that face our people. Issued by Francois Rodgers, Chief Whip to the DA in the KZN Legislature, 27 May 2019