Mashaba Insources 939 Security Guards on Workers’ Day 1 May 2019 On today’s occasion of Workers’ Day, the multi-party government finalised the insourcing of security guards by insourcing a final 939 security guards. The completion of this task on Workers’ Day is a notable achievement, with this day so often being marked by political rhetoric. The City of Johannesburg departed from this by bringing dignity to the lives of nearly 1000 security guards. Working closely with the EFF, the multi-party government has now insourced over 3700 security guards since 2018. Each of these security guards will bring home 50% more in take-home pay, along with the benefits of a pension. Insourcing represents a departure from the past practices of the City of Johannesburg which saw over R700 million being paid annually to politically connected security companies. Each security guard earned under R4000 per month, while the security companies received more than R12 000 per month per security guard. What the City has achieved is to redirect the lucrative profit margins of these politically connected companies, and direct them to the families of nearly 4000 families in the City of Johannesburg. The insourcing program achieves dignity in the lives of these security guards, while containing the escalating contracted services in the City of Johannesburg. I know that these security guards will serve the City of Johannesburg with pride, after we have achieved so much for their dignity. The City of Johannesburg will also ensure that the current specialised security guards will continue to serve the City under any new company that is appointed. This Workers’ Day is a special occasion where the City can signify its departure of the exploitative labour practices of previous governments. Our multi-party government has demonstrated its commitment to improving the relationship with the workers of our City. The insourcing program is evidence of the strength of our multi-party coalition government. It is a testament to how political parties can work together in the best interests of our residents and the workers of the City of Johannesburg. I would like to thank Councillor Donald Mabunda of the EFF for his commitment to assisting this program with the multi-party government. I would also like to thank each of my coalition partners who have supported this program from the beginning; the ACDP, IFP, COPE, UDM and VF+. Together, we work to deliver change in our City, and the support of these dedicated partners has achieved a stronger, more effective government in Johannesburg. Issued by Luyanda Mfeka, Director, Mayoral Communications, Office of the Executive Mayor, 1 May 2019