FF Plus to increase pressure on ANC in Gauteng 23 May 2019 The FF Plus strengthened its position in the Gauteng provincial Legislature yesterday when the Judge President, Dustin Mlambo, swore in Adv Anton Alberts, Ms Amanda de Lange and Mr Kobus Hoffman as Members of the Legislature. The Members of the Legislature sent a clear message to the ANC in Gauteng regarding their intention to continually put pressure on the already wounded party so as to make sure that its support keeps diminishing. The ANC only just managed to hold onto the Gauteng province in the recent elections as it won by a single seat. The shrinking party's dwindling support was evident once again yesterday when the ANC won the premier candidate nomination of David Makhura with just a few votes. The FF Plus will use the ANC's low number of voters to its advantage by tabling motions that address the very issues that the people of South Africa are concerned about. The FF Plus will, among other things, keep fighting to have e-toll abolished, to ensure that Afrikaans and mother-tongue education remain in schools, to ensure a drastic improvement in health care and government service delivery so as to stimulate the creation of more job opportunities. Concerning education, the focus will remain on the protection and promotion of mother-tongue education, building more schools, the maintenance of existing schools and the protection of parents' right to send their children to the school of their choice. The party will strive to improve the services rendered by hospitals and clinics by providing enough medicine and equipment and maintaining the infrastructure. The FF Plus believes that the safety of every single person is paramount and will thus ensure that a comprehensive rural safety plan is implemented and executed in cooperation with the police. As caucus leader, Adv Alberts will serve on the Education and Health Care Portfolio Committees, while Mr Hoffman will represent the party on the Community Safety Portfolio Committee. Ms De Lange will serve as Chief Whip and will provide financial oversight in the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. The FF Plus will keep fighting back to ensure that the party gains even more support in the upcoming municipal elections in 2021. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus chairperson, MPL and caucus leader in Gauteng Legislature, 23 May 2019