100 years of education, 0 months of jobs 2 May 2019 Growing up in a shack in the Atteridgeville informal settlement, Tshwane, my parents taught me that l must work hard, go to school and get good marks in order to live a better life. I obtained Matric, and I was the only child in my family who got admission to a University. After completing my degree I got a well paying job, and indeed I was living a better life than that of my parents. Unfortunately, today, when South African parents encourage their children to work hard and go to school their promise of a better life is not a given. In fact, too often it is a lie. South Africa is failing its children. Under the ANC’s leadership the official unemployment rate is 27%, and the expanded rate is 37%. The percentage of unemployed South African youth is even higher. There is no better illustration of this problem than these young people beside me here today. They kept their end of the bargain, but our country didn’t. The young people beside me represent 100 years of education, but 0 months of jobs in their chosen fields. Some of them have held temporary jobs, some of them work for low wages in call centers and the like. Most of them still live with their parents as South Africa has not provided them with opportunities so that they can forge a path of their own and support themselves. We are in danger that the generation represented by the young people standing beside me may be the first generation in South African history to not have a better life than their parents. There can be no higher indictment of ANC leadership than this. South Africa is not making progress at the most basic level - we are going backwards, and it is time for change. Where the DA governs, we are making progress. In these areas rates of economic growth are higher than in their neighboring constituencies. There is more private investment because businesses know they will be treated fairly and not be taken down by corrupt political leadership. There is better service delivery, and citizens are getting a better return on their investment when they pay their taxes. The ANC and their corrupt leadership is scaring away investment, and without investment there are no new jobs. The young people beside me are paying the price. The ANC government only cares about enriching themselves and rewarding those close to them with employment – not about creating more, fair job opportunities. The DA is different. The DA has a very specific offer to create more jobs through economic growth. We will: - Introduce a Voluntary National Service – one year of income and skills development for school-leavers. - Create job centres throughout South Africa that provide information, advice and free internet to job-seekers. - Grow small business opportunities through increased funding assistance and removing blockages and red-tape. - Pass a Jobs Act to encourage businesses and individuals to invest in existing, and new businesses. Next Wednesday South Africans have a choice: to re-elect the ANC and continue our downwards spiral where a new generation of South Africans become the first generation to lead a worse life than their parents. Or, you can be bold and vote for Change. Vote for the DA for better economic opportunities, honest government and efficient service delivery. Vote for the DA to give young South Africans hope for their future and a return on their investment of hard work and education. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Premier Candidate, 2 May 2019