FF Plus encourages Afrikaans parents to register their children at Afrikaans schools for 2020 on 20 May 16 May 2019 The FF Plus wants to remind and encourage Afrikaans parents to register their children at Afrikaans schools from 08:00 on the 20th of May. The Gauteng Department of Education has an online system that parents can use to do so. It is important to do this seeing as the system and the regulations according to which learners are allowed to enrol at schools are politically motivated and aimed at forcing Afrikaans schools to accommodate learners who speak other languages, which will ultimately result in these schools becoming English. The FF Plus believes that the current system was implemented with one goal only and that is to destroy Afrikaans schools. Thus, Afrikaans parents must be quick to register their children at Afrikaans schools on Monday the 20th of May so as to fill these schools with Afrikaans learners for the 2020 academic year. The Constitutional Court determined that a school that is filled to capacity cannot be forced to accommodate learners who speak other languages. Afrikaans schools are decreasing in number due to government interference. The ANC government is intentionally creating a situation where there are not enough schools for learners who speak other languages by not building new infrastructure despite having adequate budgets. In this way, Afrikaans schools are forced to accommodate learners who speak other languages, which marks the beginning of the end of the culture of many of these Afrikaans schools. Afrikaans parents can resist this by acting quickly on Monday and ensuring that their children are speedily registered at Afrikaans schools for the 2020 intake of learners. The online system can be accessed at https://www.gdeadmissions.gov.za/ If you experience any problems with the registration system, you are welcome to send an email to the FF Plus at help@vfplus.org.za with the subject line: Gauteng school admissions. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus chairperson and Gauteng spokesperson: Basic Education, 16 May 2019