SACP strongly condemns attacks on the Minister of International Relations and Co-operation, Lindiwe Sisulu 19 May 2019 The SACP denounces the attacks by the South African Jewish Board of Deputies and Zionist Federation on the Minister of International Relations and Co-operation, Cde Lindiwe Sisulu. In an article carried by the Jewish Report, the South African Jewish Board of Deputies’ vice president Zev Kregel labelled the Minister “the single biggest threat to South African Jewry”. This accusation is nothing but rubbish and racist, and is dismissed with the contempt it deserves. The Daily Maverick carried a story headed “Lindiwe Sisulu’s downgrade of Israel embassy could cost her top Cabinet” appointment. The South African Jewish Board of Deputies and Zionist Federation have no powers in terms of our country's Constitution to appoint any minister or exercise any authority vested in our state. The SACP resolutely condemns the state capture manoeuvres and vows to intensify the mobilisation of its structures, as well as that of the working class at a large, to combat the corrupt conduct and undermining of our democratic national sovereignty. A few years ago, the apartheid state of Israel prevented Dr Blade Nzimande, while the Minister of Higher Education and Training, from gaining entry into Palestine to perform his government functions. There was nothing whatsoever in response from both the International Relations and Co-operation Department and the Presidency at that time. That time is now over! This is the time for action. The SACP reiterates its unwavering support for the decision, taken by our government and being implemented by the Department under the leadership of Minister Sisulu, to downgrade the status of the South African embassy in Israel to that of a mere liaison office. The SACP is firmly behind the fundamental right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, democratic national sovereignty, and has consistently supported the two-state solution based on the pre-1967 borders with a viable Palestinian state. Issued by Alex Mohubetswane Mashilo, National Spokesperson and Head of Communications, SACP, 19 May 2019