ANC Gauteng province thanks voters for renewed mandate 12 May 2019 The ANC Gauteng Province is humbled and grateful to the people of Gauteng for a renewed mandate following the outcome of the 2019 Provincial and National Elections which saw 2 168 253 (50.19%) of people voting for the party in Gauteng. We do not take for granted being given yet another opportunity to work with the people of our province to grow Gauteng together. We view this opportunity as a privilege and not a right. It is a clear message that the people still have confidence in the ability of the ANC to lead this province and to pursue the agenda of building a better life for all. We commend the voters for coming out in numbers to cast their votes and to ensure that ours is a democracy that works. Even in the face of inclement weather at some point during voting day the voters exercised patience and showed a determination to have their voice heard through the ballot. The ANC appreciates the competitiveness shown by other political parties . This was indeed a tough race and we commend them for the spirit with which they participated in these elections. Now we have to channel our energies towards making sure that citizens of Gauteng get nothing but the best of service. We extend our utmost appreciation to our volunteers, the Alliance partners, supporters and members of the ANC at large for the hard work they have put in making sure that the ANC emerges victorious in these elections. We remember the sacrifices of compatriots like Mme Ms Susan Mohanoua Matona (79) a staunch member of the ANC in Ward 7, Sello Hlanyane Branch in Emfuleni, Sedibeng who died moments before she could vote at her voting station in Bophelong, Vanderbijlpark. The death of mme Matona shall not be in vain. In her memory and of those that paid the ultimate price to secure our democracy, we will double our efforts to honour the social contract we have with the electorate through the People's Manifesto which was the basis upon which we have been mandated to govern Gauteng. We have taken note of the issues the people of Gauteng raised with us during the campaign trail such as resolving housing concerns, unemployment and job creation, and local government issues - fixing potholes, refuse removal etc. This we will immediately work on addressing. Issued by Tasneem Motara on behalf of ANC Gauteng, 12 May 2019