Parliament receives list of members to the National Assembly 15 May 2019 Parliament today received the list of 400 designated members for the National Assembly (NA) of the sixth democratic Parliament. Today’s handover follows the declaration by the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) on Saturday 11 May, of the results of the 2019 National and Provincial Elections. Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng handed over the list to Acting Secretary to Parliament, Ms Baby Tyawa, at a ceremony in Constitutional Hill this afternoon. The Chief Justice had received the said list from the Electoral Commission Chairperson, Mr Glen Mashinini. The Chief Justice, in line with his powers under the Constitution, also declared the 22 May 2019 as the date for the first sitting of the National Assembly and the 23 May as the first sitting of the National Council of Provinces. Noting that the constitutional duty to take the electoral process to its conclusion rests with the Chief Justice as Head of the Judiciary, the Chairperson of the IEC is required to present to the Chief Justice, the list of those identified by their respective political parties as the people’s representatives in Parliament and the Provincial Legislatures. At least 14 of the 48 political parties who contested the election qualify for representation in the National Assembly. Following today’s handover, on Wednesday 22 May, Justice Mogoeng will swear in designated members of the National Assembly. Once sworn in, Members of the National Assembly will elect the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the NA. This will then be followed by the election of the President of the Republic. The first sitting of the NCOP will follow that of the NA on Thursday 23 May 2019. During its Sitting, Justice Mogoeng will swear in permanent delegates of the NCOP who will in turn term elect the NCOP Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, and House Chairpersons and Chief Whip. Issued by Moloto Mothapo on behalf of Parliamentary Communication Services, 15 May 2019