ANC decision on Gumede: what's taking so long? 21 May 2019 The Democratic Alliance in eThekwini is deeply concerned that the ANC has not yet forced Mayor Zandile Gumede to resign. The ANC has not taken any concrete action on her position and she is insistent that she should remain Mayor of eThekwini. Gumede is facing incredibly serious charges and is out on R50 000 bail. Her term as Durban’s Mayor has been characterized by maladministration, corruption and chaos. For the case to proceed fairly and without prejudice, it’s key that Gumede is completely removed from any access to the city and its administration. As the mayor is the Chair of the city’s Executive Committee, her continuation as mayor will undoubtedly delay the municipality’s proper functioning. The investigative report, which is the basis for the current prosecution against Gumede, offers scary insight into her ‘reign of terror’ in eThekwini. It has been viewed by the Democratic Alliance leadership, and includes evidence that: - Gumede had repeatedly attempted to interfere in the appointment of departmental heads who she believed would be amenable to her plans; - Gumede had repeatedly interfered in the disciplinary processes of officials who had been found guilty of wrongdoing, going as far as to appoint a Legal Head who would take instructions from her; - Gumede had repeatedly interfered in supply chain management processes, going as far as to call committee members to ANC offices and rebuke them for not appointing service providers of her choice; and - Gumede and fellow accused Mondli Mthembu had attempted to “usurp the function of the City Manager” by disregarding all laws that disallow politicians to interfere in the administration of the municipality. It’s clear that the charges for which she is on trial for are the tip of the iceberg. Gumede’s leadership has been reckless, vindictive and petty, and the people of eThekwini have suffered immensely as a result. The ANC must fire Gumede and stop allowing her to interfere as she pleases. The DA will continue to fight for the future of eThekwini. Issued by Nicole Graham, DA Caucus Leader: eThekwini, 21 May 2019