EFF STATEMENT ON SWEARING IN OF ITS SECOND GENERATION OF MPS, ELECTION OF SPEAKER OF NA AND PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Wednesday, 22 May, 2019 The EFF congratulates the second generation of its Members of Parliament who were sworn in today in the National Assembly. We reiterate our gratitude to the people of South Africa for a renewed mandate with 44 EFF MPs, from 25 in 2014. Under the stewardship of the CIC Julius Malema, these servants of the Economic Emancipation Movement shall fearlessly pursue and represent the African Socialist Revolution in those benches of the National Assembly. We also congratulate T handi Modise and Lechesa Tsenoli for being elected Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly respectfully. We call on them to discharge their duties with absolute faithfulness to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. They must avoid, at all times, to bow to the pressure of partisanship. They must preside over the house with fairness, treating every MP with equality and respect. The EFF congratulates Cyril Ramaphosa for being elected President of the Republic. We reiterate the CIC Julius Malema's words that he must know that he is not elected by white monopoly capitalists. He must rule in the interest of the masses of our people and not the Oppenheimer and the Ruperts. Ramaphosa should remember at all times that the people of South Africa, in particular black people, and Africans in particular must come first. The true test of any leadership in this country is its ability to prioritize the dejected, downtrodden and marginalized masses of our people. Our very first and historic duty to them is therefore the resolution of the land question. Land must be expropriated without compensation for equal redistribution. Without attainment of this historic objective, South Africa remains in the chains of colonialism of a special type. As EFF, we reiterate our vow to the people of South Africa that we shall hold the executive accountable without any fear or favor. We shall fearlessly and unequivocally stand for the interest of the working class in general, and black people in particular. Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 22 May 2019