SADTU Limpopo welcomes appointment of the new MEC for Education, Cde Polly Moshielo 23 May 2019 SADTU Limpopo Province wishes to take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of the new MEC for Education in Limpopo, Cde Polly Boshielo. Cde Boshielo needs no introduction as she is an avowed educational activist who has shown great passion and dedication towards matters educational. She comes across as someone who is highly decorated academically and her scholarship is quite diverse. Over and above that, Cde Boshielo has a vast experience in the public service that spans many years. It is our fervent wish and hope that she will translate this into tangible and practical solutions that are so highly needed to improve the educational outcomes in the province. It is a matter of public knowledge that the province is beset by a number of challenges ranging from infrastructure backlogs relating to classrooms and sanitation at schools. The issue of security at schools as well as auxiliary staff provisioning are some of the challenges confronting the province. The issue of the self-imposed austerity measures in terms of the Treasury Instruction Note 7 still rears its ugly head in the department. These issues need serious attention and we believe Cde Boshielo has the wherewithal to tackle them without fail. As a union organising in the education sector, our primary function and objective is to advance the interests of our members, and educational transformation broadly. To that end, we subscribe to the adage that says; “Nothing about us without us”. We hope and believe that the new MEC, coming as she does from the ranks of the SACP, cherishes the ideal of stakeholder engagement. Having said that, we are willing to work hand in hand with her in a collaborative manner to take the education of the province to dizzy heights. As we wish her good luck in her new role and responsibilities, we are looking forward to having a meaningful and fruitful engagements with her going forward towards advancing the agenda of educational transformation. Long Live SADTU! Issued by Tjebane Sowell, Provincial Secretary, SADTU Limpopo, 23 May 2019