STATEMENT BY MR LIONEL ADENDORF Since I started my own reputation and integrity management consultancy in 2018, I indicated to the Provincial Secretary of the ANC in the Western Cape that I would not be as actively involved in managing the PEC’s media and communications portfolio as before due to these new responsibilities and possible conflicts. It was then agreed that the PEC would acquire the services of a media liaison to assist with the administration of all communication functions until after the elections and it was also agreed that someone other than myself would coordinate all communications around the elections. Three months before the elections I was then requested to reconsider my position and asked to coordinate the communications around the elections - a position I reluctantly accepted due to the urgency and need but insisted on the condition that I do not speak on behalf of the ANC or the elections team. Last week, following a decision by the provincial officials of the ANC in the Western Cape, I was then requested by the acting chairperson of the ANC to manage the communications around a particular donation received and to communicate decisions around it to the media. Again, due to the urgency of even this matter, I reluctantly agreed with the expressed agreement that my involvement would only be limited to this particular matter. This morning I was asked by some journalists about a statement, purported to be that of the ANC in the Western Cape, that I was “relieved” of my duties as “political head of communications in the province” and that I do not “speak on behalf of the ANC”. Due to these untruths being spread about my own name with the sole intention to blemish my reputation, it is important that I, in my personal capacity, defend myself and talk about a matter that has now become personal. I have attended the PEC-meeting yesterday and when the chairperson of the meeting closed that particular meeting at around 20h45, I left with many other PEC-members. During this particular meeting that I attended, the matters raised in subsequent statements were not discussed and decisions presented in these statements were not taken. Since I became involved in this matter of the donation a day before the elections, I have been subjected to insults on social media and in personal messages, have received threats and been intimidated and I have also been subjected to insults and threats in three telephone calls received from private numbers. This is a consequence I never anticipated, never asked for and certainly do not have the energy or time to deal with. I will continue to fight for the most credible and responsible ANC in which those with integrity, motivated by the highest moral and ethical standards always find a home. Its reputation remains sacrosanct and should always be advanced and protected. That is after all the reasons why I joined the ANC, agreed to serve in it’s structures and continue to lead through it despite the attacks on or the threats to my person or my career. Statement issued by Lionel Adendorf, 18 May 2019 *** Media Advisory Saturday, May 18, 2019 Please be advised that the Provincial Executive Committee of the ANC in the Western Cape decided on Friday night to relieve Comrade Lionel Adendorf of his duties as political head of communications in the province. All official ANC communications will come from the office of provincial secretary Faiez Jacobs. Comrade Adendorf does not speak on behalf of the ANC. Also, note that Mahendra Shunmoogam was a volunteer in the ANC elections office and does not speak on behalf of the ANC. We are also in the process of removing him as the administrator of our official Twitter account. From now onwards, any posts from him on this account do not represent our official views. Issued by Dennis Cruywagen, 18 May 2019 