On the Radar: - New Riverbed strategy director Features: #BrandFocus: KFC South Africa still innovating & collaboratingby Sabrina Forbes. For Suhayl Limbada, KFC South Africa marketing director: innovation, because KFC is considered a South African brand by most, it needs to stay true to that. Van der Haar on change, creativity & transformationby Jessica Evans. While Odette van der Haar has embraced her new position at Publicis Africa, she remains involved in the ACA, and it seems she still has much to do. #BigQEmployers: No bigger subject than issues of reputationby MarkLives. How successful have local ad agencies been in creating positive employer reputations? What do they consider best practice, how do they measure their reputations among employees and what impact has positive employer reputation had on their ability to attract star talent? Alistair King is our next panellist to tackle this Big Q. Q5: Changing the words we use about Africa, with Mimi Kalinda [interview]by Carey Finn. The group CEO and co-founder of the Africa Communications Media Group is passionate about African markets and the narratives in and around them. #BigQNarratives: SA adland can’t champion what it doesn’t understandby MarkLives. Veli Ngubane is our third panellist to tackle: "Are SA ad agencies and brands embracing an authentically African narrative and aesthetic or do they continue to imitate US and European work?" Columns: Masterclass Notes: Trends from #AdForumSummit Londonby Johanna McDowell. Here are seven possible trends that stood out at the recent AdForum Worldwide Summit in London, 22–25 September 2019. An Accountant in Adland: The greatest storyline ever told [S2 E1]by Siwe Thusi. For me, strategy is storytelling, and plot twists are ultimately insights that change the course of storylines. Clicks ’n Tricks: Crafting a winning digital marketing award entryby Charlie Stewart. Having recently returned from another year of judging a very mixed bag of Assegai entries, I thought it’d be useful to offer some pointers as to what constitutes a winning award submission. Thinking B2B: How tech is changing B2B marketingby Warren Moss. Marketing technology (martech) has come a really long way over the last few years, particularly in the B2B arena. As powerful as it is, it still needs to be implemented properly. SA TV Ratings:- SABC 1 — primetime top 20 for Aug 2019 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify.biz headlines! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.