EFF celebrates 70 years of Communist Party governance in China 1 October 2019 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) congratulates the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) for Seventy years of being in government in the People's Republic of China. The Communist Party took over control of the then Republic of China from the nationalist government, which was riddled with corruption and gross incompetence. When the CCP took over in 1949, and ushered in the People's Republic of China, the most thoroughgoing programme for the emancipation of all the people of China began. One of the most important interventions immediately after the CCP took over was the introduction of the Agrarian Reform Law of 1950, which facilitated the expropriation of the land and property of rural landlords, and redistributed these to landless peasants, fulfilling the revolutionary promise to the landless people of China. Most importantly, this law removed the feudal and semi-feudal class in China, which had amassed almost all of China's property into a few hands. The law also confiscated the property of traitors, the so called "bureaucrat capitalists", and especially the 'four big families" of the nationalist party, the K'ungs, Soongs, Chiangs and Ch'ens, and that of a corrupt group of the so called foreign direct investors. This put to an end the power of monopolies in China, and became the basis for centrally planned industrialisation, and a comprehensive programme of socialisation of production and wealth. This proves our long-held belief that there would never be any comprehensive programme of wealth redistribution and cessation of monopoly control of wealth until a revolutionary state takes over the means of production, and redistribute these to the workers. The Chinese revolution indeed provided 'leaps forward' in our conception of development, and eradication of bourgeois control of the means of production. When Deng Xiaoping took over the leadership of China in 1978, a solid basis for upscaling the socialisation of the economy was already laid. Since 1978, China has managed to increase its GDP per capita eightfold, with annual GDP growth averaging more than 9.5 percent for a continual period of 30 years since 1978. China's growth between 1978—2005 outranked all other countries in the world. China has had a consistently high growth in every decade of reforms since 1978, despite significant slowdowns in 1981, 1989, and 1990. Between 1978 and 1986, China's GDP grew by 8.6% on average. Between 1988 to 1997, the economy grew at 8.6%, and between 1998 and 2005, it grew at 8.1 %. China has redefined the role of State-owned enterprises, and these play an ever-increasing role in expanding the economy in China and internationally. This has contributed immensely to the development of the Chinese people, and the percentage of those living in poverty dropped from 88 % in 1981 to 6% in 2017. The example set by the Chinese Communist Party provides a solid learning basis for all revolutionary across the world, and is inspiration for all that it is possible to develop economies and people on the basis of socialised ownership and control of productive resources. It is further solid evidence that as a precursor to the emancipation of all, it is necessary to exorcise from national consciousness the predatory culture of politics sustained by the narrow nationalist clique now in power in South Africa. The EFF salutes the revolutionary Chinese Communist Party, their success is ours too, and it continues to give us the courage to go forward with our own struggle here for the eradication of the many by the few. Issued by Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, National Spokesperson, EFF, 1 October 2019