Department of Public Works incapable of maintaining Government properties 23 October 2019 In a reply to a Democratic Alliance (DA) Parliamentary question, the Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure, Patricia De Lille, revealed that of the 387 vacant residential properties owned by the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure (DPWI) approximately 339 are in a derelict and dilapidated state. The Parliamentary reply further revealed that none of the vacant properties are in a good condition and a further 81 properties are of such a standard that they should be demolished. It would seem that DPWI is incapable of maintaining and preserving government properties. The longer these properties remain vacant the more prone they become to vandalism which impacts the value of these buildings as well as the surrounding properties. As the Zondo Commission continues to unravel the decade of waste and corruption, it becomes clear that the decaying infrastructure is no doubt a result of maladministration and financial mismanagement at the hands of the ANC government.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0'])); Public money allocated for the maintenance of these properties clearly did not end up being used for its intended purpose. Instead, these properties are crumbling and are unable to be used to drive economic growth and development. In her response to the DA’s question, Minister De Lille was unable to give concrete answers as to what Government’s plans were for these dilapidated and vacant properties. The DA will, therefore, submit further Parliamentary questions to ascertain where these properties are located, whether they would be suitable for affordable housing and how much the department owes to municipalities for these vacant properties.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0'])); The DA is of the belief that these buildings could either be sold off to supplement the strained state coffers or that it should be converted for affordable housing. South Africa has a major need for “gap housing” which is geared towards middle-income persons who earn too much to qualify for social housing but earn too little to qualify for a bond. National Government talks a big game when it comes to affordable housing in DA-led governments, yet, when it comes to properties in its hands they are full of excuses. For years, DA governments in the Western Cape have urged the National Government to release land parcels for the development of social and gap housing in Cape Town – to no avail. It’s time for the government to stop playing politics and do the right thing. Issued by Samantha Graham-Mare, DA Shadow Deputy Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure, 23 October 2019