ANC Western Cape calls for Iqbal Survé to be treated fairly Monday, 21 October 2019 THE ANC in the Western Cape is calling for an end to what appears to be a disinformation campaign being run in the news media against the head of Sekunjalo Investments, Dr Iqbal Survé. Earlier this month, the Financial Sector Conduct Authority raided Sekunjalo’s Cape Town offices. “We find it strange that the FSCA has as yet failed to raid the Steinhoff group, or its former CEO Markus Jooste, a person allegedly involved in South Africa’s biggest corporate fraud,” said Ronalda Nolumango, co-ordinator of the ANC Western Cape Interim Provincial Committee. We have also noted the Public Investment Corporation’s (PIC) comments that it is considering liquidating his media group to realise R1.5-billion it is owed by Sekunjalo Independent Media. Reportedly the PIC also wants to reclaim money it had invested in Dr Survé’s Ayo Technology Solutions before its listing on the JSE in December 2017. At the weekend, there were reports which speculated that because it thinks Sekunjalo Holdings could be moving assets offshore, the PIC believed it would be a logical step to have the company liquidated. “We find these reports alarming. We regard Dr Survé as a friend and well remember how his entry into the world of newspaper-ownership broke the grip that the Democratic Alliance had had on some Independent Media titles,” she said. We also saw how his entry into this industry, opened the way for a black trade unionist and journalist such as Aziz Hartley to complete the journey from a messenger on Cape Times to Editor of Cape Argus. He also reversed the scandalous way in which another journalist and freedom fighter, Aneez Salie, was treated by this newspaper group and had him elevated to Cape  Times Editor. These are just two of the moves that he made to advance BEE. We call for fairness and a respect for Dr Survé’s constitutional rights. Statement issued by Ronalda Nolumango, co-ordinator of the ANC Western Cape Interim Provincial Committee, 22 October 2019