On the Radar: - New ECD for M&C Saatchi Abel JHB- McPherson appointed to Publicis Worldwide team- Viral Choice, Antistax appoint digital agency- All the 2019 AMASA Award winners Features: #AgencyFocus: Flowing in the right direction with Flumeby Sabrina Forbes. Digital marketing and PR agency, Flume, was founded six-and-a-half years ago by Jacques du Bruyn and Ruan Oosthuizen, two friends at the same phase in their lives but in different industries who decided to create something of their own. #BigQEmployers: Save the talent — save adlandby MarkLives. Karabo Songo is our next panellist to tackle: "How successful have local ad agencies been in creating positive employer reputations?" eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0']));Q5: Kirsty Dugmore on evidence-based marketing [interview]by Carey Finn. The chief growth officer at SugaSpice unpacks this concept for us, adding behavioural economics and neuromarketing to the mix. #BigQNarratives: An exciting time to be young, creative & Africanby MarkLives.  Nomaswazi Phumo is our fourth panellist to tackle: "Are SA ad agencies and brands embracing an authentically African narrative and aesthetic or do they continue to imitate US and European work?"  Columns:eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0'])); Young, Gifted & Killing It: Mimi Kalindaby Veli Ngubane. Mimi Kalinda has juggled crisis comms in Nigeria, airline work in Ethiopia and B2B work in Zambia; she’s also an author and has led workshops on storytelling and narrative in leadership. The Suit: In a world gone mad, it’s time to call itby Jason Harrison. The world has truly gone mad. As a suit, how are you building business advantage for your clients? The Power Report: Remember who pays your salaryby Megan Power. There’s seldom a day that passes when some public or private organisation selling a product, service or idea leaves you in no doubt that it just doesn’t get it. Only Connect Podcast: Retail & ecommerce in a recession • Ep 6by Bradley Elliott. We speak to Veldskoen co-founder, Nic Latouf, about ecommerce and going global in this sixth Only Connect podcast episode. SA TV Ratings:- DStv — primetime top 30 for Sep 2019 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify.biz headlines! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.