Speaker says SA's commitment to world peace remains unwavering 15 October 2019 National Assembly Speaker Thandi Modise says South Africa’s commitment to world peace and progress remains unwavering, as the country strives to domesticate international conventions and treaties aimed at achieving a better Africa and a better world. Speaker Modise was addressing the first plenary session of the Inter Parliamentary Union’s (IPU’s) 141st Assembly in Belgrade, Serbia, which discussed parliamentary roles, mechanisms and the contribution of regional cooperation in strengthening international law. Addressing parliamentarians and other delegates from 179 national parliaments, Ms Modise said South Africa’s first consideration is always to promote the principle of international social justice. For this reason, it always supports the peoples of occupied territories, such as those living in Palestine and Western Sahara. Ms Modise also noted that countries around the world all have a responsibility to live in peace with one another. They also have a collective responsibility to uphold agreed-to standards and values, as spelt out in the United Nations Charter, which establishes “conditions under which justice and respect for obligations arising from the treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained”. Speaker Modise appreciated the continuous growth and recognition of national parliaments and supra-national parliamentary bodies, such as the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum (SADC PF) and the Pan African Parliament (PAP). These partner structures, including the IPU, help find practical expression for South Africa’s founding value of ubuntu, which sees the essence of humanity as inter-connectedness and inter-dependence among all the peoples of the world.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0'])); Spelling out what South Africa will do to strengthen international law, Speaker Modise called for support for regional structures, such as the PAP and SADC PF. She cited the model laws that various SADC member states and parliaments should adopt to better align and collectively implement both legislation and policies aimed at ensuring a better life for the people of the region. Parliaments can be described, Ms Modise said, as critical intermediaries in complex international decision-making processes in that they provide citizens with an opportunity to influence governance. South Africa’s constitutionally mandated public participation framework for law-making is one example of this important role in action. Speaker Modise also said every effort must be made to realise the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16, which calls for peace, justice and effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels of governance. Speaker Modise is supported at the IPU by seven South African Members of Parliament from various political parties who are there to represent and advance South Africa’s goals in numerous IPU statutory structures, which will meet during the five-day conference. The discussion at these meetings will shape the resolutions that are adopted by the IPU plenary on the last day.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0'])); Issued by Moloto Mothapo on behalf of Parliament of South Africa, 15 October 2019