On the Radar: - Burger King switches agencies- New deputy MD for Digitas Liquorice- Creative Circle: Aug, Jul & Jun 2019 winners- Dentsu Aegis to support female-founded startups Features: Press Pass: Streaming service Viu targets SA with freemium modelby Carey Finn. Viu country manager South Africa, Ryan Solovei, shares insights into the company’s local operations. Young, Gifted & Killing It: Tshepo Tumaholeby Veli Ngubane. This award-winning copywriter’s career kicked off after winning a copywriting bursary he’d heard about on YFM and being given a break by Ahmed Tilly. Frank: Why your daughter should be the next performance consultantby Mimi Nicklin. So, here it is: working motherhood in the ad industry is tough. Really tough. But not in the way the media makes out it to be. AdForum Worldwide Summit London: - Day 3: VCCP, MullenLowe & Anomaly- Day 2: "Media is an art, not an algorithm" — Sir Hegarty- Day 1 Par 1: Clients taking back control of data, processes- Day 2 Part 1: Gender balance a focusby Johanna McDowell. There was a controversial start to the AdForum Worldwide Summit London, 22-25 September 2019, where comments from the media and participants focused on the huge bias towards male leadership. Regular Reads: #BigQDiversity: “I choose to celebrate women”by MarkLives. Masego Motsogi of Grid Worldwide is the last female executive to give us her assessment of the state of adland. #BigQDiversity: That inner circle? Incredibly hard to crackby MarkLives. Keri-Ann Stanton of Avatar is the next key female executive to give us her assessment of the state of adland. Q5: How to hack a brand, with Sarel Delport [interview]by Carey Finn. Sarel Delport, ECD of Autonomous Republic and part of the brains behind the recently launched Hack-A-Brand online store, unpacks the concept of “hacking a brand” for us. Q5: Exploring new realities, with Lebo Lekoma & Jade Duckitt [interview]by Carey Finn. Animation studio Sea Monster’s commercial head and creative director talk about the potential of AR, VR, gaming and more for local brands. SA TV Ratings:- SABC 3 — primetime top 20 for Aug, Jul 2019 - SABC 2 — primetime top 20 for Aug, Jul 2019 Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify.biz headlines! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available.