Some four years ago I began a journey. I joined the Democratic Alliance because I felt our country was set on a parlous road, that the ANC was complicit in charting this perilous path, and because I found a home in a party that believed in individual choice, non-racialism, a market economy, the rule of law and more – values and principles that are close to my heart. I cut ties with my ANC heritage and embarked on path that has been as challenging as it is enriching. I have been a loyal member of the party, but have never shied away from stating my view, from standing up for what I believe to be right. I have also respected the internal democracy of the party. I will continue to do so. That is the essence of democracy. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));There are differences of opinion in the party I joined. Various people have differing views about how we deliver on our essence and our principles for the good of our country. I respect these differences because I believe that those who subscribe to common party values are good people, united by a common goal. Debate and discussion is a cornerstone of democracy. It needs to be encouraged. I will always champion this. I will not allow myself to be silenced in the pursuit of faux unity, nor will I rock the proverbial boat for the sake of causing discord. I respect my fiercest detractors and will engage them with honour. If lines are crossed, I will hold the transgressors to account; I expect to be held similarly to book. I reserve the right to question the motives and actions of those who drive a factionally divisive agenda, who vilify people personally, and who need to provide answers to questions raised around probity and rectitude. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0']));Perhaps, I am not cut out for the political games some people engage, but my commitment to our country gives me strength. I will always honour the rich history of my family’s contribution to freedom in our country – spanning a period of more than a century – that always stood on the side of what is right. I am immensely proud of this and I will be guided by this spirit as I continue my journey. I will moreover not allow myself to be used as a mouthpiece to drive the agenda of any faction. My country comes first, and I will champion inclusivity and the equality of opportunity regardless of the circumstances of anyone’s birth. Recent events in my party – factional discord, lack of clarity on key policies, issues around probity and electoral failure – are testing our mettle. We have commissioned an internal review to address much of this, and other aspects are being dealt with as I write. This is welcome, and will help recalibrate the party. It is sorely needed if we are to continue to hold the governing party to account and posit viable alternatives to build a country and a nation that is able to hold its head up high for the sake of its citizens and as a beacon in a complex continent an world. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));We are in need of more loyal servant leaders who will be able build unity around a common cause, who will help steer the party in a direction that honours internal democracy and debate, who are able to hold a framework together that will strengthen the party and deliver the DA to its rightful place in the body politic of our country. I believe Helen Zille is able to contribute to achieving this. She has my full support in her return to active politics as she contests the position of chair of Federal Council of the Democratic Alliance. Ghaleb Cachalia , MP Democratic Alliance