DA finds no financial wrongdoing committed by Federal Leader Mmusi Maimane Following a number of anonymous leaks and subsequent public speculation regarding the accommodation and travel arrangements of Democratic Alliance (DA) Leader, Mmusi Maimane, the Leader himself referred the matter to the Party’s Finance Committee Chair for a due diligence investigation in order to establish the facts. The DA's Finance Committee is an institution that acts as the custodian of the Party’s assets, finances, financial regulations and ethics in relation to it, and we believe is best placed to advise the Party in this regard. As Chairperson of the Finance Committee, I formally met with Mr Maimane on Monday 30 September and Friday 4 October.  In said meeting, Mr Maimane produced the relevant facts required – supported by documentation - and as such I have come to the following finding: As it relates to travel arrangements, Mr Maimane did enjoy the use of a Toyota Fortuner in the Western Cape, donated to the party by Steinhoff via their subsidiary, Hertz. After the Steinhoff scandal broke, the car was returned. There was a delay due in part to the leader’s international trip to the USA and a Federal Congress taking place in Gauteng. As it relates to the Leader’s home, it has been established that no formal lease document exists. However, Mr Maimane has paid rent covering each month he and his family have lived in the house. I have had sight of the accounts of the business which owns the house. I have followed the financial trail as follows: An initial deposit of R450 000 was made by Mr Maimane; from April 2018, R18 400 per month was deducted as rental; the current balance is R100 540; the utility bill payments are made separately by Mr Maimane and in addition to this rental amount. Mr Maimane nor his trust own shares in the business and the house. Mr Maimane indicated that the arrangement was a lease agreement and the financial trail confirms that. Therefore I am satisfied that there exists no financial illegality on behalf of Mr Maimane as it pertains to both the house and the car. Statement issued by Dr Dion George MP - Federal Finance Chairperson, 4 October 2019