Plessislaer SAPS Baby Rape: DA calls for immediate intervention by KZN Police Commissioner 17 October 2019 The Democratic Alliance has written to KZN Provincial Police Commissioner, Lieutenant General Khombinkosi Jula and newly appointed KZN Community Safety and Liaison MEC, Bhekuyise Ntuli (view here) to call for immediate intervention following an allegedly shocking lack of assistance by Plessislaer SAPS officers after an 11 month old baby was raped. According to the little girl's mother, the horrific incident took place in late September at a local day care centre while she was at work. When she first suspected that her baby had been raped she immediately visited Edendale Hospital hospital where a doctor confirmed her worst fears. She then tried to open a case of rape at the Plessislaer SAPS but was allegedly turned away. She claims that it was only after she persisted for five days that she was given any assistance and was finally able to open a docket. To add to this, the allocated investigative officer has allegedly not been in touch with her to update her on the progress of the case, nor has the accused been arrested. The DA is outraged by this apparent lack of professionalism and compassion by SAPS officers. To make matters worse, a recent media report has also indicated that other rape victims have been turned away from the same police station. This young mother has completely lost confidence in the police to protect her and her family. Despite the fact that the accused is known, nothing has been done to secure an arrest. This entire case is heart-breaking particularly since the Constitution of South Africa makes it crystal clear that the South African Police Service is responsible to prevent, combat and investigate crime, protect and secure, uphold and enforce the law and create a safe and secure environment for all people. Earlier this week, 1 500 male police officers marched against gender base violence and the Minister of Police, Mbeki Cele promised that no one will be turned away, when victims of abuse approach the police. Yet here we have a young woman and her family who have had to beg for help. The DA expects the Commissioner Jula to give this matter the prompt attention it deserves. We also expect him to launch an immediate inquiry and to ensure that those officers who were found guilty of such shocking conduct are dismissed. The DA will be keeping a very close watch on this matter. Our province cannot afford to allow officers who are not willing to comply with their mandate to continue to be in the employ of the state. Issued by Sharon Hoosen, Spokesperson on Community Safety and Liaison, 17 October 2019