Art exhibition at Grantleigh Curro school: Education is never without values 22 October 2019 The FF Plus shares the shocked sentiments of Christian groups in response to the artworks of a learner at the Curro school, Grantleigh, in Richards Bay. This incident once again emphasises the tension between communities' established value systems and the radical individualism of the liberal ideology. In the runup to the transition of 1994, the FF Plus endeavoured to promote group rights, which creates a space for cultural and religious communities to maintain and express their convictions. Education and training are particularly important in this context. The then NP and DP, however, preferred the radical individualism of the liberal constitutional state. In pursuance of this ideology, it is not only education in Afrikaans that is being eroded, but also education with a Christian foundation. It is ironic that this incident transpired at a school that claims it has a Christian ethos.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0'])); It is important to note that the school explains the artworks as criticising the way in which religion is practised and not God or Jesus as such. While the artist has now undertaken to explain every artwork in detail, it would have been much wiser to provide such explanation beforehand. The strong negative response of the Christian religious community certainly does not come as a surprise. It is obvious that the artist intended to shock viewers. If those viewers are the parents and learners of a so-called Christian educational institution, then it is important to approach any discussion of the matter with caution. While the FF Plus does not support censure, the party finds various aspects problematic. If displaying the former South African flag, for example, justifies a court order, then one would expect that the beliefs of other groups, like Christians, should also be treated with sensitivity as well.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0'])); The FF Plus will keep a close eye on the public's response to the art exhibition, while re-emphasising the party's commitment to education and training of a Christian nature. Issued by Wynand Boshoff, FF Plus MP and chief spokesperson: Basic Education, 22 October 2019