Agri SA supports the revised Rural Safety Strategy 11 October 2019 Agri SA supports the South African Police Service’s (SAPS) revised Rural Safety Strategy that was launched today in Louis Trichardt. The strategy highlights once again the urgent need to curb crime in rural and farming areas. If the strategy is implemented with committed dedication by the police, it will be a great success. “The urgent implementation of the strategy by all stations commanders is necessary,” says Tommie Esterhuyse, chairperson of Agri SA’s Centre of Excellence: Rural Safety. “Otherwise the strategy will only be an excellent strategy sitting on the shelf gathering dust.” Rampant crime affects not only the farmer but also farm workers and the rural community. These crimes not only pose a threat to the stability in the rural farming areas and the country, but also puts food security at risk. The continued attacks on farmers and farm workers, high level of stock theft and the levels of farm infrastructure destruction, requires an effective strategy to deal with these issues. Agri SA believes that the Rural Safety Strategy is the most appropriate vehicle to deal with these crime issues.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0'])); “It is however concerning that the reservist system, which forms the backbone of the strategy, is over years not yet fully implemented,” says Esterhuyse. “We call on the police to actively promote the reservist system and make it possible for farming and rural communities to participate and play a role in securing their environment. The police must commit themselves to make the necessary resources available to the reservists and the strategy.” Agri SA has always had a constructive relationship with the police, especially concerning matters of safety and security and would like to congratulate the police on the development and finalisation of the strategy. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));“We believe that it is the only workable strategy with a focus on combatting farm attacks, stock theft and farm infrastructure theft,” says Esterhuyse “The strategy will address organised crime incidents, stock theft and the theft non-ferrous metals as well as cross-border crime. The establishment of rapid response teams to respond to rural crime incidents of a violent or organised nature is further welcomed.” Agri SA will do everything in its power to co-operate with the police in implementing the strategy and thereby assisting farming communities to safeguard themselves. The Rural Safety Strategy can be found on the SAPS website. Issued by Tommie Esterhuyse, Chairperson of Agri SA’s Centre of Excellence: Rural Safety, 11 October 2019