INTERESTS OF JUSTICE HAVE NO BORDERS The Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, Mr Ronald Lamola, notes the action taken by the United States of America (USA) to ensure that the South African interests of justice unfold without any hindrance. This comes after the USA announced that they have imposed sanctions against the Gupta brothers and Salim Essa. Sanctions have a direct impact on the financial and private interests of affected individuals. Furthermore, these sanctions will ensure that companies or individuals are prohibited from conducting any business in the USA or with any American company worldwide. South Africa and USA have a long history of cooperation on criminal justice, law enforcement and Mutual Legal Assistance. Both countries are State Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption and have a Bilateral Treaty. These International Multilateral and Bilateral Frameworks allow law enforcement agencies of both countries to collaborate on matters of common interest like fighting corruption and ensuring that perpetrators of corruption have nowhere to hide. In the context of this international and domestic legal framework, our two countries have enjoyed close collaboration on matters of mutual legal assistance. Under the umbrella of the International Cooperation in Criminal Matters Act, South African law enforcement agencies have issued Mutual Legal Assistance requests to eight countries around the world, including the United States of America. Minister Lamola has taken action to ensure that the execution of these requests is expedited. Minister Lamola says it is of critical importance that our young democracy confronts corruption and its antecedent effects expeditiously. He welcomed the collaborative efforts by the USA government in the country’s fight against corruption. “The interest of justice must not be shackled by any boundary or border and justice must be seen to be done without fear or favour,” said Lamola Statement issued by the Ministry of Justice and Correctional Services, 10 October 2019